Shattered Siena Williams mother of Willemiena Williams who was raped and murdered in Darling, Cape Town.
(Photo: Vincent Cruywagen) The body of Willemiena Williams, 19, was discovered around 3am on Monday 2 November 2020 in the backyard of a house on 9th Avenue. The victim had previously lodged a charge of rape with SAPS in August but had withdrawn the complaint. The teen sustained fatal stab wounds to her torso and her abdomen was slit open. This is one of at least six reported rapes in the area, including that of a five-year-old child, since October this year. It is the first murder case. The deceased’s devastated mother, Siena Williams, 52, could only manage to say: ‘I was just told that my child was murdered, I went to the scene and saw her lying there..”  before she trailed off sinking into a couch, tears streaming down her face, her hands trembling. The murder of Willemiena is reminiscent of the brutal rape and slaying of 17-year-old Anene Booysen in February 2013 in Bredasdorp. Anene was raped, disembowelled and left for dead on a construction site. Archie Mbhele, chairperson of the Darling Action Group said a truck driver doing deliveries around 3am on Monday 2 November had noticed a suspicious person carrying an unidentified object slung over his shoulder. The driver followed the man and witnessed him turning into the yard on 9th Avenue where he dumped what turned out to be Willemiena’s lifeless body before fleeing the scene, Mbhele said. The driver stopped, found Willemiena’s lifeless body and called the police. SAPS spokesperson Andre Traut confirmed that Darling police had responded to a complaint regarding a stabbing incident at 9th Avenue. There they found the body. The motive for the brutal murder and mutilation of the young woman is unknown at this stage. A man was arrested a few hours later at 6.15am on the same day and is yet to appear in court. Willemiena’s cousin, Fransiena Sias, 28, told Maverick Citizen that the suspect had allegedly raped Willemiena about four months ago. “She opened the case but later withdrew it. She was very scared of him. I last saw her alive on Friday, 31 October when she went to Pep Stores,” she said. Sias said that Willemiena regularly overnighted with an Aunty Ragel. “But on Monday morning around 3am someone frantically knocked on my door and when I opened, the woman told me the body of Willemiena is lying in a backyard. She didn’t deserve to die like this.” The incident has also cruelly ripped open old wounds for 23-year-old Leslie Solomons and brought back horrible memories of her sister Perchiaan Solomons, 18, who was brutally raped, assaulted and left for dead five years ago (2015). Perchiaan was set alight and had cigarette burn wounds on both her legs, which today remain as a reminder that her sister had  miraculously escaped death, said Solomons. Recounting the events in an interview with Maverick Citizen Solomons said: “Perchiaan was brutally raped in 2015. She couldn’t walk and managed to crawl until her nephews saw her. She was in terrible pain and they called her mother. “She struggled a lot and suffered from mental illness. In the hospital her condition quickly deteriorated and she became paralyzed in both her legs and right arm. She was forced to use her left hand but later she became used to it. The saddest part is that her womb was removed,” she said. While the family did not talk about the incident, the spate of rapes in the area had reopened an old wound and brought back horrific memories. Another 38-year-old woman, also from the area, and who survived an attempted rape in the early hours of Monday, 12 October 2020 told Maverick Citizen she was asleep in her bed when she was woken by someone attempting to remove her clothing. “I grabbed the hand of the attacker and he tried to jump underneath the bed. I jumped out and switched on the light. I saw this drunk guy sitting in the corner of the room. I took out a knife and told him if he moves that I will stab him,” she said. The victim managed to call neighbours who alerted the police. The drunk suspect was arrested after he had passed out on the bed. Mbhele said the spike in rapes and serious crimes committed in this popular rural area and holiday destination could be attributed to alcohol abuse and the increased numbers of dealers selling Tik (methamphetamine) in the area. “We suspect that a group of people are involved in the rapes committed in the area. In one of the incidents in October 2o2o an adult woman who was under the influence was raped and sodomised by three unknown assailants whose faces were covered.” The victim had been unable to identify any of her attackers. “The scourge of alcohol abuse and selling of Tik needs to be rooted out before we can secure a safe environment for women and children,” Mbhele said. DM/MC Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 1 I have no words to express my outrage at the violence and barbarity inflicted on women in our country.