Singer John Legend is joined onstage by his wife, Chrissy Teigen, while performing before Democratic vice presidential nominee Sen. Kamala Harris (D-CA) speaks at a drive-in election eve rally on November 2, 2020 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden, who is originally from Scranton, Pennsylvania, remains ahead of President Donald Trump by about six points, according to a recent polling average. With the election tomorrow, Trump held four rallies across Pennsylvania over the weekend, as he vies to recapture the Keystone State's vital 20 electoral votes. In 2016, he carried Pennsylvania by only 44,292 votes out of more than 6 million cast, less than a 1 percent differential, becoming the first Republican to claim victory here since 1988. (Photo by Mark Makela/Getty Images)  The album first reached us with the release of the lead single, Conversations in the dark, in January this year. Following that release, came Actions and the title track, Bigger Love. Yes, Legend is devoted to using love as his muse, and he remains a firm believer in its power to conquer all; a few may find it corny, but they’re probably not exactly Mr Legend’s target market. His latest offering is an ode to joy, love and hope; and in addition to the album’s upbeat and joyous feel, the 41-year-old crooner, songwriter, producer, actor and philanthropist displays his ability to combine vintage sounds with a more contemporary sound. This is perhaps most evident in the album’s opening track, Ooh Laa, which seamlessly combines that mid-20th Century doo-wop sound, with 808s, the kick drum sample that’s become a staple in the trap subgenre of hip-hop. On the second track, Actions, he looks to hip hop again, as he samples Dr Dre and Snoop Dogg’s iconic track, The Next Episode from Dr Dre’s 2001 album. The familiarity of the sample draws you in, and when the drop comes, Legend slots back into his neo-soul pocket. It feels just fresh enough, without alienating fans. Released in June this year, Legend doesn’t necessarily push himself out of his comfort zone in his latest offering, not nearly as much as he did in 2016’s Darkness and Light, and we’re not sure we’d want him to anyway. Considering how far 2020 has pushed us out of our comfort zones, perhaps it’s best for John Legend to sound like… well… John Legend. There are no surprises here, no moments that will push the craft forward; Bigger love is like a never-ending message of love, positivity and everything that Legend believes is good about the world. It almost comes across as 16 different versions of his 2013 hit, All of me, which was dedicated to his wife, model, cookbook author, and Twitter superstar Chrissy Teigen. In between his 2016 album and Bigger Love, Legend released a Christmas album in 2018 called A Legendary Christmas with singer, songwriter and multi-instrumentalist Raphael Saadiq as the executive producer. Once again, Saadiq reunites with Legend on this album in the same role. Earlier in June, in an interview with The Associated Press, Legend jokingly said: “We’ve got some musical superheroes with superpowers in here.” Indeed, the combination of artists featured is enviable, from alternative r&b and neo-soul artist, Jhene Aiko, featured on the song U Move, I Move, to American blues rock singer and guitarist, Gary Clark Jr, on Wild. The 2018 Best Rap Album Grammy nominee, Rhapsody, flows effortlessly on Remember Us; American producer, Camper, who’s worked with Brandy and Big Sean, jumps on I’m ready. The stand-out feature has to be young Jamaican reggae artist, Mikayla Simpson, known as Koffee. Legend brings Koffee in for the 12th song on the album, Don’t Walk Away. The Afro-Caribbean influence is evident in the song, which was co-written by Jamaican producer, Di Genius. The upbeat tempo gives it a light dance hall feel and Legend pushes himself just enough to fit the Caribbean sound of the song. I do is definitely the most fun and the easiest to sing along to. The catchy and vibrant pop number was co-written by American singer and producer Charlie Puth. The instrumental matches Puth’s energetic music, and Legend mellows it down nicely on the vocals, from the very first verse as he professes his love: “When I think about the messes I’ve made, Think about the rest of my days, I wonder if you’ll stick with me or walk away, I think about all of my faults, Will you love me just because? Do you believe that we could last forever, babe?” The album is a simple, uncomplicated, and enjoyable listen. Songs like One Life, I do and Remember Us stand out for their variations in sound. One Life is particular, is defined by its celebratory feel, and co-writer and producer Anderson Paak’s drums and a classy bass. The message on the chorus might encourage you to escape 2020’s worries and enjoy life for what it has to offer: “We’ve got one life, I won’t waste it, one life, I’m gon’ taste the joy in every minute.” But, perhaps, everything you need to know about the message and tone of this album is to be found right there on the second verse of the album’s title track, Bigger Love: “I don’t wanna think about nothing
The world feels like it’s crumbling
Everyday, another new something
But in the end, in the end
Can’t nobody do us in
I just wanna think about loving” ML/DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet