BRACKENFELL, SOUTH AFRICA - NOVEMBER 20: Police disperse crowds with teargas during the EFF Mass Protest on November 20, 2020 in Brackenfell, South Africa. The protest action follows a controversial incident at Brackenfell High School where a group of students and teachers were accused of hosting a private, ‘whites-only’ matric dance. (Photo by Gallo Images/Brenton Geach) A permit was granted for the EFF protest outside Brackenfell High School today, giving permission for 100 protestors to hand over a memorandum to the school. The EFF said the aim of the protest was to highlight alleged racism and segregation at the school, something that learners have posted about on social media. At the heart of the matter was a private function organised by parents to celebrate the end of matric after the traditional matric dance was cancelled due to Covid-19. It was claimed that black learners were neither informed nor invited to the function. Two teachers apparently attended the function on a wine farm. EFF secretary general Marshall Dlamini negotiated with police, requesting that they increase the number of protestors allowed to march to the school. An agreement was reached that 500, instead of 100, protestors could approach the school. However, metres down Paradys Road, EFF supporters tried to barge their way through the cordon and the barricade and police opened fire with stun guns and teargas. Protestors scattered in all directions. Police maintained a perimeter and negotiations resumed. The stalemate lasted for over an hour, with more EFF members joining the protest. By 3pm, there was still no sign of party leader Julius Malema. A barbed wire cordon was erected around the school, with the Cape Party setting up a tent outside the premises. Leaders of the party said they were there in solidarity with the residents of Brackenfell. Around 3pm a white man approached Dlamini as he was addressing the crowd, an argument ensued which led to a scuffle. Some in the crowd started assaulting the man and police once again fired stun grenades and rubber bullets. There are reports of injured protestors. This is a developing story. DM/MC Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 2 “Some in the crowd started assaulting the man”. Oh, that is the EFF’s version of “peaceful”, “non-violent”, I take it. I take serious issue with the police allowing the EFF to “negotiate” an increase in the numbers. Hopefully this wholesale breach of restrictions will be dealt with at the highest level. With COVID suddenly crawling out of the woodwork again, EFF leadership had no business encouraging this. Its about time the EFF were forced to obey rules. Why though, did they agree to the increase to 500, the records show that these people cannot be controlled. This has got to stop – there should be no negotiation at alll.
Peaceful, Non Violent protest? Assaulting a man?
EFF leaders are getting away with so much – this should never have been encouraged.
Hopefully these breaches will be dealt with in a significant manner