Spirali pasta with a sauce of bacon, green olive and capers. (Photo: Tony Jackman) Ingredients 200 g spirali pasta or other “small” pasta shape 5 rashers back bacon, fried and cut into strips 2 Tbsp olive oil 1 medium red onion, chopped 2 garlic cloves chopped ½ cup of green olives, pitted 1 Tbsp whole capers (not caperberries) 1 glass dry white wine 1 cup/250 ml cream Handful parsley, washed, dried, stems removed and the leaves chopped very finely Parmesan shavings to garnish Salt and pepper to taste Method Fry the bacon, cut into small pieces and set aside. Add olive oil to the same pan and sauté red onion with garlic. Add wine and reduce until syrupy. Add cream and reduce to about half. Return bacon to the pan. Simmer. Add chopped pitted green olives and whole capers. Season to taste with salt and ground black pepper. Meanwhile, cook the pasta in briskly boiling water until al dente, and drain, but preserve 2 or 3 Tbsp of the pasta water. Add the pasta water to the pasta pot and toss everything about with two wooden spoons over a medium heat for a minute or two. Run the cooked pasta through the sauce being sure it is all coated. Sprinkle with chopped parsley. Serve with curls of shaved parmesan. DM168/TGIFood Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Send your Lockdown Recipes to tony@dailymaverick.co.za with a hi-resolution horizontal (landscape) photo. Thank God It’s Food is sponsored by Pick n Pay. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet