* Huge demonstrations in capital for 12 straight weeks * Riot police use force to disperse protesters * Leader Lukashenko says has no intention to quit (Updates number of arrests) By Tom Balmforth Mass demonstrations have flooded the capital for 12 straight weeks since a disputed election, ratcheting up pressure on the embattled leader of 26 years who rejects accusations the vote was rigged and says he has no intention of quitting. This week Lukashenko partially closed the border to the west, replaced his interior minister and said that any protester who lays a hand on officers policing the protests should “at least leave without hands”. Tens of thousands of people swept through Minsk in at least two columns, the Nasha Niva newspaper reported. The Vesna-96 rights group published the names of 221 people who had been detained. Senior police officials have threatened to use firearms against protesters if needed. “The situation is really alarming and everyone’s mood is tense,” one protester who requested anonymity said by phone. “Police buses and equipment are constantly driving past the column. It feels like people are ready for any kind of escalation.” A witness told Reuters that riot police used force to disperse marchers who had marched towards Kurapaty, a site on the outskirts of Minsk that is a memorial to victims of execution by Soviet secret police. “People got to a field near Kurapaty, (police) buses pulled up and chased after people at top speed, then they started throwing grenades. What’s more, they were throwing them into the thick of the crowd,” the witness said by phone on condition of anonymity. A man in civilian clothing chased a resident through a courtyard near one protest route firing a paintball gun at them in footage published by the RFE/RL media outlet. Video posted on opposition social media showed a crowd of people chanting “We believe, we can, we will win!” while marching through the streets. The video footage could not independently be verified. Mobile phone internet in the capital was unavailable and several metro stations were briefly closed down. (Writing by Tom Balmforth Editing by Raissa Kasolowsky and Frances Kerry) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet