Roast chicken with chimichurri butter. (Photo: Tony Jackman) My usual chimichurri sauce is made of parsley, oregano, garlic, chillies, olive oil, red wine vinegar, salt and pepper. This one is non traditional in that it includes spring onions/scallions. Normally chimichurri is chopped, not blended. However, because this is for a butter, it’s best to blend it before mixing it with the butter. Ingredients 1 medium whole chicken, giblets removed, rinsed and patted dry ½ cup (when chopped finely) of fresh parsley, without stems ¼ cup fresh oregano, picked from its stems and chopped 3 or 4 fat garlic cloves, peel and chopped 1 or 2 red chillies, chopped finely (with seeds or lose the seeds, as you like) 3 spring onions, sliced thinly, including some but not all of the green parts ⅓  cup extra virgin olive oil 2 Tbsp red wine vinegar ½ tsp coarse salt ½ cup soft butter Ground black pepper to taste Method Combine all ingredients in a bowl and blend. Mix with the butter. Salt the chicken well inside the cavity and all over the skin. Using a silicone spatula, carefully spoon some of the butter under the skin of both breasts. You’ll have to use your (clean) hands to slather  most of the rest of the butter all over the skin of the bird, but keep about a quarter of it aside for use later. Roast in a preheated 240℃ oven for 30 minutes. Turn the heat down to 200℃ and roast for a further hour. About 15 minutes before it’s cooked, remove from the oven and smear the remaining chimichurri butter over it. Once cooked, allow it to rest in the turned-off oven for 15 minutes. Note: I cooked them on a bed of quartered potatoes and onions. That’s optional if you’d like to. DM/TGIFood Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Send your Lockdown Recipes to tony@dailymaverick.co.za with a hi-resolution horizontal (landscape) photo. Thank God It’s Food is sponsored by Pick n Pay. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet