Minister of Health Zweli Mkhize was expected to introduce rapid antigen testing in the Eastern Cape this week to faster identify patients with coronavirus infections. (Photo: Gallo Images/Darren Stewart) Minister of Health, Dr Zweli Mkhize, was this week expected to introduce rapid antigen testing to faster identify patients infected with Covid-19 in the Eastern Cape, after warning that they were under pressure to get a coronavirus outbreak under control in the province. There have been 8,682 new Covid-19 cases in the Eastern Cape, with most being reported in Nelson Mandela Bay. In a summary for the Eastern Cape health department, officials described the current outbreak: “The confounding factor is the misconception that lower levels of lockdown are equivalent to ‘no Covid-19’. “Non-compliance with the regulations at taverns and unsupervised funerals have become public health risks, which may contribute to the spread of the disease.” The report added that government’s “self-defeating tendencies or practices by government departments” – including long queues with no physical distancing during the payment of social grants at the department of home affairs – and fully loaded taxis are contributing to the rapid spread of the virus. It is understood that epidemiologist Prof Salim Abdool Karim told the provincial command council on Sunday it’s estimated that for every one new case found in the province, there are between 10 and 19 cases that remain undiagnosed and that a subsequent increase in cases in Buffalo City, the Chris Hani District (a large health district around Komani) and the Amathole District can be expected in the next two to three weeks. According to a breakdown of the figures, the number of positive cases in Nelson Mandela Bay has increased by hundreds of new cases each day. Two weeks ago, cases were soaring by 900 a day. Mkhize said nationally the cumulative number of patients testing positive for coronavirus crossed the 750,000 mark, with a recovery rate of 92% and a case fatality rate of 2.7% – which compared favourably with global statistics. He said it has been 45 weeks since the first infections were reported. “We never ran out of beds, oxygen or ventilators. In fact, most of the ventilators were not used. We made adequate provision,” he said. He said the number of new cases in the country had plateaued around 1,000 a day since the end of August. “But now we have moved back to around 2,000 new cases a day.” This, Mkhize explained, was caused by a delayed peak in provinces such as the Free State. However, they were also seeing “worrying” new activity in the Western Cape and the Eastern Cape. “We can’t say this is a new surge. We say we are watching it to see.” He said they are also seeing worrying increases that need monitoring in parts of the Free State, Limpopo and North West. “We are monitoring to see where this Covid activity is,” he said. Mkhize said they have noted “more intense activity” in Nelson Mandela Bay, the biggest metro in the Eastern Cape. He said he will be visiting the province on Tuesday. “We know there is a lot of pressure on health workers,” he said. “We are keeping an eye on the health workers.” “Hospitals in Nelson Mandela Bay are under pressure,” according to Dr Sibongile Zungu, the acting superintendent-general of the Eastern Cape health department. She said a 100-bed ward would be opened at Dora Nginza Hospital in Nelson Mandela Bay, as would a 72-bed high care ward at Livingstone Hospital. There are currently 968 patients in hospitals in the province, with 850 in general wards, 103 in intensive care units, 15 in high care, 310 on oxygen and 56 on ventilators. “There is a drive to recruit more doctors. We will be receiving support from Doctors without Borders and doctors from the Cuban brigade who have been working in quieter districts in the province will be moved to Nelson Mandela Bay,” she said. The briefing report, shared by Zungu on Friday, states that between Thursday and Friday, 37 patients in the province died of Covid-19-related complications, with another eight dying the day before. The Buffalo City metro currently has the highest Covid-19-related mortality rate in the province, with 117.9/100,000 deaths followed by the Nelson Mandela Metro with 108.6/100,000 deaths and the Sarah Baartman district, including large parts of the Karoo and Jeffreys Bay, Humansdorp, Kareedouw and the Baviaanskloof at 62,3 deaths per 100,000. During the briefing on Sunday, Mkhize stressed that they considered testing an important aspect of the fight against Covid-19. However, Zungu’s report said there was an increasing number of results being released by as much as 72 hours later after testing. “The proportion of results which were available within 72 hours has decreased from 95,0% in the last week of October to 76,2% in the current week. “The proportion of results which were available within 24 hours also decreased from 71,1% to 44,2% during the same period,” her report stated. Karim had briefed the provincial joint command council on the current outbreaks in the province and presented an action plan to get the current resurgence of infections under control. This included mass testing and tracing and increased engagement with the taxi industries and tavern owners. Karim’s presentation also confirmed, as did Dr Thobile Mbengashe, who is in charge of the province’s Covid-19 response, that rapid antigen testing – a faster test to determine possible infections – will be used to bring the resurgence under control. In an effort to curb the spread of the virus, Nelson Mandela Bay and the health department will be holding training and workshop sessions with tavern owners after the liquor trading sector was found to be the biggest contributor to Covid-19’s spread. Nelson Mandela Bay’s acting executive mayor, Thsonono Buyeye, said on Saturday that business owners and leaders in the religious sector must work with the government. “It is important to train all these sectors and make sure they understand Covid-19; what to do and what is expected of them, and how to conduct their businesses during the pandemic. “One of the business owners says training was never done for taverns and I think we agree that it is something that needs to be addressed as a matter of urgency so that we don’t have people pleading ignorance,” Buyeye said. The secretary for Concerned Township Liquor Licensed Traders, Mongameli Ngqokwe, said all liquor trading structures and their members needed to be trained and involved in the fight against Covid-19. DM/MC  Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 1 The events in Buffalo city are likely to recur in other parts of the country. It would be a good idea for the DoH to put together a rapid reaction team to ‘parachute’ in to affected areas as they happen.