Ugandan musician-turned-MP Bobi Wine smiles during a discussion with prominent Kenayn political activist Boniface Mwangi in Nairobi, Kenya, 12 October 2018. A vocal Ugandan Member of Parliament Bobi Wine, whose real name is Robert Kyagulanyi, was charged with treason for allegedly stoning President Yoweri Museveni's convoy during a by-election in August 2018. Upon returning from US where he received treatment injuries he sustained during detention, he was re-arrested at the airport. EPA-EFE/DAI KUROKAWA On Tuesday 3 November I was arrested, beaten and tortured by police shortly after registered my candidacy to challenge President Yoweri Museveni in next year’s Uganda election. I was pulled from my car and thrown into a van after submitting my nomination papers to election officials in the capital Kampala. The entire event was captured on television cameras. Ever since airing my opposition to the government of President Yoweri Museveni, myself and my fellow members of the National Unity Platform have faced constant harassment, restrictions on our movement and intimidation at the hands of the security forces. Museveni will be running for his sixth term as president in 2021 after amending the constitution twice to allow him to carry on ruling. He has been in power since 1986 and is determined to stay there at any cost, including the lives of his citizens. Museveni ran out of ideas to transform Uganda a long time ago. Today he is only interested in power for power’s sake, not for the sake of Uganda’s 43 million people, 41.5% of whom live in poverty at the international benchmark of $1.90 per day. Half of our population is under the age of 15. Only half have completed primary education. It’s a shocking circumstance. Yet our 76-year-old president, who has been in power for 34 years, wants to stay there. To put the duration of his rule in context, Idi Amin led Uganda for just eight years. While he may represent the entrenched interests of the Facelift generation, President Museveni knows how much of a threat the Facebook generation poses. This explains why he blocked internet coverage in earlier elections, among other rigging and intimidation tools. Already, in the run-up to the election scheduled for 14 January 2021, it is impossible for us to campaign outside Kampala as we are blocked by security forces from travelling. Our experience of intimidation ranges from a frightening attempt on my life to the absurd charge I faced for “annoying the president”. My latest encounter with the security forces occurred shortly after my formal nomination as the presidential candidate of the National Unity Platform (NUP). I had just filed my candidacy for the presidential election when I was picked up by the police. Police smashed my car’s window of his car, arrested me, and drove me around for five hours. I was beaten up. I had pepper spray sprayed into my eyes, and my hands were burnt. I was dumped at my house. No reason was given for my arrest. All this for contesting an election. The world needs to wake up to what is happening in Uganda. The electoral commission has not spoken out about this event. The chair of the commission feigns ignorance when he was 100 meters away from where the arrest took place. The state media has, of course, been silent about the incident, although the president’s son came out to boast about it on Twitter. Running against Museveni is not a fair fight. He knows he would lose anything approaching a fair fight. Instead we run against the full force and resources of the institutions of state. He routinely uses the army and police to defend his interests, to ensure that he wins. His campaigns are lubricated by patronage. Yet President Museveni receives more than $2 billion in international aid every year. Why do the donors fund our oppressor? Such bias towards the regime over its people has become even more skewed with Coronavirus, which has shifted international attention inward and away from African elections and governance. This trend had been worsened by the world’s fascination with the ongoing US election, and the distraction away from Africa. It is with regret that I have learned that the EU was not invited to observe the election. I can only hope that other international observers will note what is happening here. But we have learnt from the success of campaigns such as in Malawi, where the will of the people prevailed over an incumbent determined to cling onto power. I will continue with my campaign. I am strong. I have no option but to be strong. If we do not take risks, we risk everything. I’m carrying on, and I’m going to do everything that I’m entitled to do as a citizen. I am not going to be violent and they are going to continue to expose themselves. Democracy is worth the risks.  DM Robert Kyagulanyi (‘Bobi Wine’) is a musician and MP. See his latest music video comparing the fortunes of Africa and Asia here. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet