epa08755574 Incumbent Guinea president Alpha Conde arrives to cast his ballot in the presidential elections in Conakry, Guinea, 18 October 2020. 82 year old incumbent president Alpha Conde is seeking a controversial third term in the Guinea presidential elections. Critics claim his candidacy for a third term is illegal as the constitution provides for a maximum of two five year mandates. EPA-EFE/PAPA SECK  “China and Guinea are good friends,” Foreign Ministry spokesman Wang Wenbin said at a regular news briefing. “We value our tradition of friendship and stand ready to work with the Guinean side to further advance our comprehensive strategic cooperative partnership to achieve benefits to our two peoples.” China has mining interests in Guinea in iron ore and bauxite, used for making steel and aluminium respectively. China is the top world producer of both metals. Guinea’s top court on Saturday confirmed Conde’s victory in last month’s election, rejecting accusations of fraud and handing him a third term his opponents said is unconstitutional. China agreed in 2017 to loan Guinea $20 billion over nearly 20 years in exchange for concessions on bauxite which the West African country has in abundance. (https://bit.ly/2U7L9WP) Baowu Group, China’s biggest steel producer, plans to invest in the Simandou iron ore mine in Guinea and develop the deposit with other steel makers. (Reporting by Cate Cadell; Additional reporting by Min Zhang and Helen Reid; Writing by Shivani Singh; Editing by Christopher Cushing) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet