Shrien Dewani and Anni Dewani. (Photo: Supplied) First published in Daily Maverick 168 It has been 10 years since newlywed Swedish citizen Anni Dewani was abducted and shot dead while on honeymoon in Cape Town on 12 November 2010. Dewani’s lifeless body was found in the back of a VW Sharan parked in Khayelitsha the morning after she and her husband Shrien had purportedly been abducted by two gunmen, who had confronted them in Gugulethu in an apparent robbery and hijacking. Anni’s killing is one of several brutal intimate partner murders that brothers Thomas and Calvin Mollett, forensic investigators and authors, have excavated post-trial. The Bloodied Bride – Did Shrien Dewani Get Away With Murder?, their third in a series of e-books, has just been published and coincides with the 10-year anniversary of Anni’s death. “Dedicated to all the victims of femicide,” the brothers have inscribed on the first page. The Mollett brothers have painstakingly unpacked evidence in two other gruesome murders – that of Stellenbosch University student Inge Lotz, who at the age of 22 was beaten to death with a hammer in her flat in 2005; and model Reeva Steenkamp, who was shot dead by paralympic champion Oscar Pistorius on Valentine’s Day in 2014. Pistorius is currently serving 15 years for the murder. In the Lotz matter, Inge’s boyfriend, Fred van der Vyver, was charged with her murder but acquitted after a 10-month trial. In order to test the evidence in the Lotz case, Thomas Mollett went as far as procuring a rare ornamental hammer, almost identical to the alleged murder weapon, and a pig’s head from his local slaughterhouse. He used these to measure the effect of repeated blows with the hammer on a skull. Mollett also reconstructed, in his apartment, a version of the bathroom in Pistorius’s luxury home where Steenkamp was fatally wounded when the athlete fired through the door in an apparent rage. Mollett’s skill at drilling down into detail led to his handling of all the pathology reports in the Jason Rohde trial. Rohde was convicted of killing his wife, Susan, in 2016. For the past four years, the brothers have turned their attention to the evidence presented at Shrien Dewani’s 2014 trial for masterminding the murder of his wife. Shrien was implicated by driver Zola Tongo, whom he had met only a few days earlier on the couple’s arrival at Cape Town International Airport. On the night of the hijacking, Tongo was dragged out of the vehicle, while Shrien said he had managed to escape via a back window, leaving 28-year-old Anni to an awful fate. After his speedy arrest, Tongo alleged that the British businessman had been the mastermind behind the plot to kidnap and murder his bride. Shrien, who had been allowed by police to leave South Africa, spent years fighting his extradition to face charges in the Cape Town High Court. In 2014, Dewani returned and, after a sensational trial in which he confessed to being bisexual and his online cheating was exposed, he was acquitted of all charges and walked out of court a free man. Judge Jeanette Traverso found she could not rely on the police investigation and that statements taken from accomplices had been contradictory. Tongo, however, was sentenced to 18 years for his role in the kidnapping and murder, but was released in July 2020 after serving half of his sentence, much to the anguish of Anni’s parents, Vinod and Nilam Hindocha. The shocking murder and the convoluted plot involving assassins-on-speed-dial drew wide local and international attention and marked South Africa as a crime-ridden holiday destination where a hitman could be hired on arrival. Dewani did not testify at his trial, with his legal team arguing that the South Africans had planned and executed the hijacking, robbery and murder on their own. Dewani, now 40, lives in the UK where he has reportedly found new love and is in a long-term relationship with a Brazillian-born model, Gledison Lopez Martins. A 2013 BBC Panorama documentary based on “secret police files” and which cast doubt on the South African investigation, “had a significant effect on the trial”, the Mollett brothers found. Their book goes so far as to suggest that Judge Traverso had taken into consideration evidence presented in the documentary that was hearsay. At the time, Anni’s uncle, Ashok Hindocha, criticised the Panorama filmmakers for not consulting the family and for playing both “judge and jury”. The brothers researched their book on and off for four years, revisiting all the relevant scenes, conducting further interviews and working from material in the public domain. Thomas Mollett sets out that the South African investigation was not a disaster:  “Within a few days, they had arrested four suspects.” While the forensic work by the SAPS had been sloppy and could have led to a better understanding as to why and when Anni had been shot, the biggest mistake police made, say the Molletts, was letting Shrien leave the country. “He was there that night and, as a witness, at least should have stayed to assist the police with their investigation.” The killing, they deducted, had not been a “botched robbery” and, furthermore, Tongo had parked the vehicle that night at the spot where the gunmen had been waiting. No evidence was led of any intention to rape or abduct Anni for ransom, but this appeared to have been an issue that “stuck” nonetheless with Judge Traverso. The most jarring evidence in the docket, the Molletts found, was that of a transcript of a meeting Shrien had with the Hindocha family on his return and which was secretly recorded by Sonal Chotai, Anni’s niece. “Compared to later versions (proven by CCTV, phone records, etc) and against his plea statement, he blatantly lied to them,” say the authors. Dewani told his in-laws that Tongo had immediately left after dropping the couple off at the Cape Grace Hotel. But it emerged in court that Dewani had, in fact, spent 10 minutes talking to Tongo as Anni checked in. There were other anomalies in Shrien’s early account to the family, including his leaving out of a crucial bit of evidence that was later presented to court – that Shrien had drawn a large amount of cash to pay for a “surprise” helicopter flip for his wife. Dewani made no mention of the “surprise flip” when he recounted the events to his family. The brothers also made the critical discovery that the alleged intermediary in the plot, hotel receptionist Monde Mbolombo, had in fact been in contact with Tongo on the night and not with one of the assassins, Mziwamdoda Qwabe. “We carefully analysed phone records and show what influence the fact that CCTV’s times and cellphone recorded times were not synchronised – which BBC Panorama used to make certain points – and on which Traverso incorrectly worked on.” The brothers argue that the court was remiss in dismissing evidence about Shrien’s online cheating and the double life he led, which could have provided a motive. The book has a specific scope, said the authors. “We are not interested in the side shows, personal lives, the families, or the court case itself; the book primarily deals with Shrien Dewani’s versions. He was there that night when his wife was killed but he never testified, so this is an effort to distil and deduce from his various versions, what the real story is behind the death of Anni Dewani.” DM168 You can get your copy of DM168 at these Pick n Pay stores.  Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet