Finance and Economic Opportunities Minister David Maynier said there is money available in key departments to help fight a resurgence of coronavirus in the province. (Photo: Flickr / Democratic Alliance) Western Cape provincial treasury says it is ready to support frontline departments as the province experiences a resurgence of Covid-19. Finance and Economic Opportunities Minister David Maynier said there is money available in key departments to help fight a resurgence of coronavirus in the province. On Thursday 26 November, Maynier delivered the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement in a hybrid sitting of the Western Cape provincial parliament, where he labelled the budget as a “Budget to Bounce Back”, following recovery efforts stemming from the Covid-19 economic downturn. The focus of Maynier’s speech was on two major issues: a resurgence of Covid-19 and the support for economic recovery in the province. ‘Ready to support frontline departments’ Last week, Western Cape Premier Alan Winde issued a “hotspot” warning over the rising confirmed cases of Covid-19 in the Garden Route towns of George, Knysna and Plettenberg Bay. This increase was attributed to the school holidays, which had occurred in the weeks preceding. However, Winde issued another warning: cases were not only rising in the Garden Route but also within the Cape metro. Covid-19 on a surge in Cape Town and Garden Route, warns Western Cape premier  Maynier, in his speech on Thursday, stressed the province could not afford another hard lockdown, stating “so we are also prepared and stand ready to support frontline departments to respond to the resurgence of the Covid-19 pandemic in the Western Cape”. Maynier said R227-million from the budget of the health department and R200-million from the Transport and Public Works Department budget had been made available for the Covid-19 resurgence. An additional R864-million from the provincial reserves can be used if needed to fight the new resurgence in cases, said Maynier. All of the help, Maynier said, “is immediately available”. The two departments received the greatest financial allocations during the “emergency budget” tabled in July 2020. The Health Department received R1.8-billion for testing, screening and procurement of personal protective equipment. The Transport and Public Works Department received R400-million for the creation of quarantine and isolation facilities. Western Cape unveils ‘Covid-19 budget’  ‘R1.4-billion support package for jobs, for safety and for wellbeing’ But the resurgence was not the only focus of the day — support for the Western Cape’s economic recovery in a post-Covid-19 world was also highlighted. “We have mobilised a combined additional R1.4-billion support package for jobs, for safety and for wellbeing in this financial year, so that we can bounce back in the Western Cape,” said Maynier before adding, “we have done so because when people have jobs, people have dignity and when people have dignity people have hope.” This is a sentiment shared by Winde, who discussed the need for a provincial economic recovery plan during a special address to the Western Cape provincial parliament earlier in October. Premier Alan Winde fleshes out Western Cape’s economic recovery plan  Maynier said treasury made the following budget allocations worth R1.4-billion: In addition to these allocations, Maynier said national government is also adding its support in the province’s economic recovery efforts. This includes: Closing his speech, Maynier said, “we all have to play our part, and so please wear your mask, sanitise, practise social distancing and stay home if you’re sick”. Budget adjustments will be deliberated among parliamentarians on Friday, 27 November. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet