Illustrative image | sources: Democratic candidate Joe Biden (Photo: EPA-EFE/MICHAEL REYNOLDS) / US President Donald J. Trump. (Photo: EPA-EFE/SHAWN THEW) Joe Biden has a slim lead of 6,826 votes in the key battleground state. He also narrowly overtook Trump in Georgia, a state that last selected a Democratic presidential candidate in 1992. Pennsylvania has 20 electoral votes, meaning that if Biden wins the state, he will have more than the 270 Electoral College votes needed to claim the White House. Votes remain to be counted in both states — and also in Arizona and Nevada, where Biden maintains leads — and more unofficial results were expected throughout the day on Friday. Decision Desk HQ, an election-data firm, has projected Biden will win Pennsylvania and therefore the presidency. Bloomberg News does not use Decision Desk HQ projections to determine election winners. The Associated Press and TV networks have not yet called the state or the final outcome. The Trump campaign immediately rejected that call. “This race is not over,” said Trump campaign lawyer Matt Morgan. He said the call was based on faulty projections in four states that he claimed had voting irregularities. “Biden is relying on these states for his phony claim on the White House, but once the election is final, President Trump will be re-elected.” The Biden campaign, however, dismissed attacks on the results and the implication that Trump might not concede. “As we said on July 19th, the American people will decide this election. And the United States government is perfectly capable of escorting trespassers out of the White House,” said campaign spokesman Andrew Bates. Speaking Friday morning on CNBC, Trump’s top economic adviser, Larry Kudlow, said he expects a “peaceful transfer of power” if Biden wins. “We abide by the rule of law and so will this president,” he said. With the result razor thin, the Georgia secretary of state said Friday there would be a recount of the presidential vote total there. Trump’s campaign is promising legal challenges that could draw out results. In a statement at the White House late Thursday, Trump said the election is being stolen from him, despite no evidence of widespread voting irregularities. “If you count the legal votes, I easily win. If you count the illegal votes, they can try to steal the election from us,” a downcast Trump said, reciting a litany of issues with vote-counting in key states. Some Republicans have spoken out against the president’s remarks. His campaign’s lawsuits to challenge the count, however, have gained little traction, with at least two being thrown out in Georgia and Michigan. Each state has been counting a surge of mail-in ballots, which skew Democratic. Biden also expanded his lead in Nevada. Biden urged his supporters to be patient as the votes are counted and expressed confidence during brief remarks on Thursday. “We have no doubt, when the count is finished, Senator Harris and I will be declared the winners,” he said at an appearance in the late afternoon, referring to running mate Kamala Harris. In many ways, the week has unfolded in the way many observers predicted, with Trump racking up leads in key states in votes counted on election night, while Biden has added to his totals with mail-in votes counted later that eroded Trump’s advantage. Trump has pointed to that change in his fortunes as evidence of fraud but it is common for the vote totals to move in the days after the election as vote counts trickle in. In addition, Trump spent so much time before the election telegraphing his contention that only votes on Election Day should be counted, and his threat to challenge the results, that it gave legal experts a chance to educate voters ahead of time. Public polls that showed leads for Biden in states such as Florida, Wisconsin and Ohio, Trump said, had created “the illusion of momentum for Mr. Biden and diminished the Republican Party’s ability to raise funds.” Biden has fallen short of polls that showed him winning Florida and Ohio, two states he lost, but also dramatically outdid Trump in fundraising. Trump’s aides had spent the day shuttling in and out of the campaign’s headquarters in northern Virginia as his team filed a flurry of complaints over vote monitoring in Pennsylvania and ineligible voting in Nevada. A case in Georgia related to 53 ballots was tossed out. Trump Allies Close allies fanned out to Pennsylvania, Georgia, Arizona and Nevada to hold news conferences and make accusations of a rigged system, with little to no evidence. Legal challenges were largely aimed at slowing or pausing counting of the votes, and were generally unsuccessful. But some Republicans spoke out against Trump’s unsubtantiated claims. “I saw the president’s speech last night and it was very hard to watch,” Senator Pat Toomey, a Pennsylvania Republican, said on NBC. “The president’s allegations of large-scale fraud and theft of the election are just not substantiated. I’m not aware of any significant wrongdoing here.” As Trump’s legal fortunes sank, Biden’s political fortunes improved and he continues to have more than one path to the presidency, with some scenarios hinging on Arizona. The Associated Press and Fox News called the state and its 11 electoral votes for Biden, but other prominent news outlets have said Arizona is too close to call — creating two different Electoral College estimates. AP has Biden leading the race for electoral votes at 264 to 214, while CNN has the tally at 253 to 213, with Arizona a toss-up. A new batch of ballots from Maricopa County Thursday night brought Trump 10,576 votes closer to Biden in that state. Trump won 57% of the new votes in Maricopa County, putting him on track to tie Biden in the state if he can match those numbers in future returns. The AP and Fox News have stuck by their projections. Biden now leads Arizona by 1.6 percentage points. The next results from Maricopa, Arizona’s largest county, are expected at 11 a.m. Eastern Time Friday morning. If Biden does win Arizona, any one of three states — Nevada, Pennsylvania or Georgia — would put him over the threshold for victory, and Pennsylvania, with 20 electoral votes, would do so regardless of Arizona. Both Senate races in Georgia are also poised to go to run-offs, after Senator David Perdue fell below the 50% threshold Thursday afternoon. He likely will face Jon Ossoff in a January runoff. Nevada Count In Nevada, Biden’s lead widened to 11,400, from 7,600 at the start of the day. The state has just six Electoral College votes, but would clinch the presidency for Biden if he also held neighboring Arizona. About 190,000 ballots have to be counted, mostly in the county that includes Las Vegas, according to Nevada Secretary of State Barbara Cegavske. Until Thursday evening, Trump hadn’t appeared publicly since the early morning hours of Wednesday, late into election night, when he said he thought he’d won the election. Later Wednesday, he declared victory in Pennsylvania and Michigan. He has been declared the loser in Michigan and the count is continuing in Pennsylvania. Since election night, Trump has been in the White House and has met or spoken with a coterie of close advisers including Hope Hicks; Dan Scavino; his children Donald Jr., Eric and Ivanka; as well as Chief of Staff Mark Meadows and Vice President Mike Pence, according to people familiar with the matter. He has also spoken with the Republican governors of two states in which the election outcome remains unclear, Arizona and Georgia, the people said. As frustration and disappointment simmered in Trump’s circles, it fell to his son to issue a call for other Republicans to speak up. “The total lack of action from virtually all of the ‘2024 GOP hopefuls’ is pretty amazing,” Donald Trump Jr. tweeted. “They have a perfect platform to show that they’re willing & able to fight but they will cower to the media mob instead.” Senator Tom Cotton of Arkansas and former United Nations Ambassador Nikki Haley swiftly fired off tweets supportive of Trump. Yet Trump’s remarks also drew cautious pushback. Maryland Governor Larry Hogan said “there is no defense for the President’s comments tonight undermining our Democratic process.” Representative Adam Kinzinger, an Illinois Republican, said he wanted every legal vote counted but that people should take hard evidence to court. “STOP Spreading debunked misinformation… This is getting insane,” Kinzinger tweeted. ‘Total War’ Donald Trump Jr. also tweeted that his father’s best option was “to go to total war over this election to expose all of the fraud.” Twitter quickly flagged that tweet as misleading, as it has with several of the president’s tweets since polls closed. Biden is confident that he will win and urging patience. Winning Pennsylvania would be particularly meaningful for Biden, who lived in the state until age 10 and was sometimes called the state’s third senator because the Philadelphia media market reaches into Delaware, which he represented in the Senate. “Democracy is sometimes messy. It sometimes requires a little patience as well,” Biden said in a brief speech Thursday. “But that patience has been rewarded now for more than 240 years with a system of governance that’s been the envy of the world.” By Josh Wingrove, Jennifer Epstein and Jordan Fabian with assistance from Saleha Mohsin, Laura Davison, Mark Niquette and Gregory Korte Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet