Will the new chair of the National Lotteries Commission be able to fix the rot? (Archive photo: Ashraf Hendricks) First published by GroundUp Making the shortlist for chair of the National Lotteries Commission are former Public Protector Thuli Madonsela, struggle stalwart and cleric Reverend Frank Chikane, and human rights lawyer, academic and theologian Barney Pityana. The three were chosen from a long list of 41 applicants by a special committee headed by Judge Dennis Davis. The names of the three people selected by the independent panel were then considered by an inter-ministerial panel, supported by senior officials from the DTI. If there are no valid objections, Madonsela, Chikane and Pityana will be interviewed by members of the trade and industry and competition parliamentary portfolio committee to replace the incumbent, Prof Alfred Nevhutanda, whose 11-year tenure ends on 30 November. The NLC has been engulfed by allegations of corruption, nepotism and maladministration. The Democratic Alliance’s shadow minister for trade and industry, Dean Macpherson, who has described Nevhutanda as “scandal-ridden”, recently called on him to resign in light of the findings of an investigation into NLC corruption ordered by minister Patel. Kavisha Patel of Corruption Watch has been monitoring the appointment process. She has written to Duma Nkosi, the chair of the portfolio committee, urging him to allow at least seven days for a public participation process, as had earlier been agreed to by the committee. During this period people should be able to make submissions raising objections to any of the candidates, she said. But, with a tight deadline for a 1 December appointment to be made, Pillay noted there were severe time constraints. Pillay said Corruption Watch welcomed the steps taken “to ensure that the process… is transparent, fair and based on merit”. “The establishment of an independent panel, as well as a ministerial panel, to review and shortlist candidates resulted in a list of individuals of proven integrity and public service being nominated to Parliament for interviewing and further deliberations,” said Pillay. “Minister Patel implemented a number of recommendations made by Corruption Watch… and has set a positive precedent for future NLC appointments.” “We strongly believe that we can safeguard our public institutions from corruption by ensuring that the selection proceedings… are transparent, based on recruitment best practice and inclusive of public participation.” DM  Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet