Lamb shanks with fresh herbs, lemon and garlic. (Photo: Tony Jackman) Ingredients (for 4) 4 lamb shanks 4 Tbsp olive oil (1 per shank) and more for browning Handful of mint sprigs Handful of oregano sprigs Handful of thyme sprigs 4 garlic cloves, chopped Juice and grated zest of 2 lemons  Salt and pepper to taste Method In a heavy oven dish or cast-iron pot/ roaster/ casserole, even a large iron-based tagine will suffice, brown the shanks all over in olive oil to give them plenty of colour. Push the fresh sprigs of herbs underneath and between the shanks (be generous, I use loads), sprinkle chopped garlic all over, season with salt and pepper. Finally, use a zester to grate lemon zest over the shanks, squeeze lemon juice over and pour 1 Tbsp olive oil over each shank. Transfer to a preheated 200℃ oven and roast for 15 minutes uncovered. Then cover and turn the heat down to 160℃ and roast slowly for 3 hours or more, until they are truly falling off the bone. Don’t leave them so long, however, that they begin to dry out. When they’re super tender and still moist, they’re just right. They’re great with creamy mashed potato, polenta, or couscous. Serve with the pan juices spooned over the shanks. DM168/TGIFood Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Send your Lockdown Recipes to tony@dailymaverick.co.za with a hi-resolution horizontal (landscape) photo. Thank God It’s Food is sponsored by Pick n Pay. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet