Bacon and banana muffins with a centre of bacon miso caramel. (Photo: Tony Jackman) Ingredients 1 ½ cups/ 375 ml Eureka Mills Traditional Unbleached Stoneground cake wheat flour 1 cup/ 250 ml castor sugar 1 tsp baking powder ½ tsp salt 3 ripe bananas 1 large egg ⅓ cup canola oil 1 tsp/ 5ml vanilla essence 4 rashers streaky bacon, fried and cut into small pieces 7 tsps Richard Bosman’s bacon miso caramel Method Sift the flour into a bowl and add the castor sugar, baking powder and salt. Stir. Mash the bananas separately. Beat the egg and add it to the banana, with the vanilla essence and canola oil. Stir into it 1 generous tsp of the bacon miso caramel. If you cannot source that, leave it out. Or go here. Fold this mix into the dry ingredients until just combined. Grease a 6-large-muffin pan (don’t faff about with those silly minuscule 12-muffin pans). Spoon in enough of the mixture to come about half way up each cavity. Make a hollow with a teaspoon and add a teaspoon of bacon miso caramel to each little well. Sprinkle bacon bits all over. Now top it with the remainder of the batter. Bake at 200℃ for about 25 minutes until golden brown. Insert a skewer to test for doneness. It should come out clean. Leave to cool on a wire rack for 10 minutes. TGIFood Tip: If you don’t have Richard Bosman’s bacon miso caramel, mash half of an additional very ripe banana and stir into it 1 Tbsp miso paste and 1 Tbsp of honey. Add a few tiny bacon bits. Eat the rest of the banana. DM168/TGIFood Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Send your Lockdown Recipes to tony@dailymaverick.co.za with a hi-resolution horizontal (landscape) photo. Thank God It’s Food is sponsored by Pick n Pay. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet