By Humeyra Pamuk The guidelines, sent on Wednesday, came after the General Services Administration (GSA), the federal agency that must sign off on presidential transitions, notified President-elect Joe Biden on Monday that he could formally begin the handover. “Following the November 3 election, representatives of President-elect Biden’s Transition Team have arrived at the Department of State to support preparations for the transition,” the email said. A “dedicated” team would support Biden’s transition team to ensure they receive the necessary information and logistical support, the email said. The State Department did not immediately respond to a request for comment. U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, in an interview with Fox News on Tuesday, also confirmed the move. “Today we began the process to see what the GSA’s decision was, and will do everything that’s required by law. We’ll make this work.” Pompeo came under fire two weeks ago at a press briefing when he said there would be a smooth transition to a “second Trump administration” despite Biden’s election victory. After hours of withering criticism, he softened his tone and promised a “good transition” for whoever was in the White House on Jan. 20, the presidential inauguration day. Biden, a former vice president, secured well over the 270 votes in the Electoral College needed to win the presidency, but Trump waged a futile legal battle to overturn the results of the election, falsely claiming that it was stolen. On Tuesday, Biden introduced his foreign policy and national security team and vowed to steer the United States away from the unilateralist nationalism pursued by Trump and work together with U.S. allies. (Reporting by Humeyra Pamuk Editing by Mark Heinrich) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet