Archive Photo: On 8 May, the Garden Route district had 64 confirmed Covid-19 cases. While this is low compared to Cape Town, numbers are expected to rise throughout the province and hospitals are in a race against time to prepare for screening, testing and treating infected patients. (Photo: Gallo Images / Nardus Engelbrecht) The Western Cape premier’s warning comes after holidaymakers were linked to an increase in Covid-19 cases in Bitou, said the provincial health department. The department has linked these new cases to the recent school holidays. Prof Mary-Ann Davies, a public health specialist with the provincial health department, said there have been no dramatic increases in cases as was previously seen during the province’s peak in July. Read in Daily Maverick: Use quarantine facilities, urges health department boss as province heads for peak infection rate However, Davies said increases of hospitalisations relating to Covid-19 were reported in the private sector, which was “ something we need to watch very carefully”. The department was monitoring the Garden Route which was experiencing a “slowish increase” in Covid-19 cases. The biggest concern was the George area, particularly in areas such as Uniondale, Thembalethu and Pacaltsdorp. The department had detected an increase of cases among people in the 20-30 age group. Davis said the biggest outbreak was in the Bitou (Plettenberg Bay) area, noting that there were just under 50 active cases at the moment. These were reportedly to be local travellers who visited the area. Davies said, “this makes sense because we know it was school holidays last week”. According to the data provided in a presentation by Davies, 19 new cases were reported in Bitou and nearby Knysna. Cases were also found among maternity ward staff, with some mothers reporting as asymptomatic. Premier Alan Winde said there was concern about a potential second wave of Covid-19 and another lockdown. “South Africa cannot afford [another lockdown]… our economy cannot afford it,” said Winde. This is not the first time Winde and his government have cautioned against a second wave and a heightened level of lockdown. Earlier in October, following a “superspreader event”, provincial health officials called for extra vigilance after 89 new Covid-19 cases were tracked to a bar in Claremont, Cape Town. These cases were largely in the age group of 15-20, said Winde. Winde said everything must be done to “make sure we avoid a second wave”, adding that “we must not let down our guard”. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet