The massacre of 6 December 1989 was one of the events that led to the first campaign of 16 days of activism that was held in 1991 and was initiated by the Women’s Global Leadership Institute. Feminists from around the globe agreed that it was necessary to recognise gender-based forms of violence. It became increasingly important to recognise that violence against women was a human rights issue. The campaign led by the Women’s Global Leadership Institute led to the start of the United Nations 16 Days of Activism against Gender-Based Violence. The campaign runs annually from 25 November (International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women) to 10 December (Human Rights Day). The 16 days of activism campaign has been held in South Africa since 1998. Since then, the incidents of violence against women and children have increased. We need not think long to find examples of violent atrocities that have been perpetrated against women in South Africa. Uyinene Mrwetyana, a 19-year-old first-year student at UCT, was raped and murdered by a post-office employee and her body was then burned in a field. The incident sparked public outrage not only for Uyinene, but for the many faceless victims who suffer under the scourge of gender-based violence and die or face violence on a daily basis. It comes as no surprise that South Africa’s rate of femicide is alarmingly high, so much so that it has been declared a national crisis. South Africans were reminded of this fact during the lockdown when some women in abusive relationships were trapped at home with their abusers. At the beginning of the lockdown, it was reported that there had been fewer reported incidents of gender-based violence, but it was later found that the gender-based violence hotline had received more than 2 300 calls in the first five days of lockdown – a marked increase over previous years. In addition to being aimed at raising awareness about and eradicating gender-based violence, the 16 days of activism is also a campaign aimed at raising awareness about gender inequalities and the stereotypes that exist about gender. Gender inequality and gender stereotypes affect the everyday lives of women and marginalised genders in insidious but significant ways. The concept of “gender” is often conflated with that of “sex’’. Sex refers to the biological aspects of a person such as physical features, genitalia and hormones. On the basis of these physical features, people are ascribed the sex of either male or female. Gender, on the other hand, refers to the societal roles that have been attributed to the different sexes. These roles are socially constructed and include the expected behaviour and expression of the relevant gender. For a long time, gender has been seen to operate in a binary mode, i.e. as either feminine or masculine. This restrictive notion of gender is problematic, as it is oppressive towards people who do not fall within the mainstream idea of what a woman and a man should be. Women are expected to behave in a feminine way and men are expected to behave in a masculine way. The stereotype of feminine expects women to wear certain clothes, not speak too loudly, occupy certain roles, and tend to the household and children’s needs. Men are expected to be strong, to lead, to not express emotions. These stereotypes are oppressive and cannot be eradicated within a short space of time. An example of these oppressive stereotypes is the various reports of attacks in townships on gay women who choose to express their identity in a masculine manner. While many laws have been enacted to fight these stereotypes, women still face an unequal burden in society. They are more likely to be employed in unskilled jobs. On average, women earn less than men in the labour market and women are often disadvantaged, as they have to commit themselves to children and household obligations. These are all key factors that influence the extent to which women are empowered. The 16 days of activism may be criticised as activism that does not bring about real change in the face of deeply entrenched structural problems. Gender-based violence and gender inequality are indeed a structural problem. It is promising that a number of new bills have been tabled to combat the structural issues that may hinder the execution of existing legislation. The Criminal and Related Matters Amendment Bill provides that sex offenders’ names that are recorded in the national registry of sex offenders should be made publicly available. The Domestic Violence Amendment Bill extends the definition of domestic violence to engagements, customary relationships, and romantic, intimate and sexual relationships so as to provide protective mechanisms to more people. The Bill also makes it possible for persons to be imprisoned or fined if they knew of an act of domestic violence against a child, disabled person or elderly person and did not report it. However, at an individual level, there is much that can be done. Promoting the rights of women is something that should concern everyone, including men. Campaigns often send a strong message to women to stand up, but it unfairly places the burden on women only. Men, too, should know that women should be treated with respect, that women cannot be excluded from opportunities simply because they are women. Activism does not only include reporting a crime to the police, it includes not laughing when someone makes a misogynistic joke, not cat-calling women, not forming bonds with other men based on the belittling of women. Universities, in particular, are spaces that need to take the 16 days of activism to heart. Universities carry with them the tremendous privilege and opportunity of influencing young people’s minds when it comes to the treatment of women and people in general. Even more, universities should be safe spaces for all people. There should never be a day when gender-based violence and unfair discrimination against women are tolerated. We need these 16 days to reflect on the fights that have been won, the people we have lost and the battle that lies ahead. For the 16 days of activism, the North-West University has planned an online event to reflect on healthy relationships and gender-based violence. It is hoped that during this time we will stand together and recommit ourselves to the fight against gender inequality. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet