Homemade tartare sauce. (Photo: Tony Jackman) Ingredients Yolks of 3 medium eggs 1 Tbsp Dijon mustard 1 Tbsp lemon juice 1 Tbsp apple cider vinegar 3 Tbsp capers, drained and chopped 3 Tbsp gherkins, drained and chopped finely 3 Tbsp spring onions/scallions, sliced thinly and then chopped smaller (use the white part and a little of the green) 2 Tbsp flat leaf parsley, chopped very finely Salt to taste Ground black pepper to taste 500 ml oil (a blend of vegetable oil and one quarter quality olive oil, or only vegetable oil; I used mainly canola) Method Plop the egg yolks, 1 heaped Tbsp mustard and the vinegar in a deep bowl or jug and blend until smooth. Drizzle the oil in slowly while blending (I used a hand-held electric whisk) until it is all incorporated into a thick emulsion. Stir in the other ingredients (don’t blend) and season to taste with salt and pepper. Be careful you don’t overwork it until it splits. When it looks thick and good, leave it alone. Note: I used spring onions because shallots are hard to come by. If you do have shallots, however, use those instead. Another alternative is red onion, which are sweeter than white or brown and more like shallots in taste, but using red ones will affect the colour of the tartare. TGIFood Tip: There’ll be plenty to store in a sterilised air-tight jar in the fridge for future use. Other than fish, use it as a sandwich spread with chicken, ham, cheese – anything that’s good with a slathering of mayonnaise. DM168/TGIFood Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Send your Lockdown Recipes to tony@dailymaverick.co.za with a hi-resolution horizontal (landscape) photo. Thank God It’s Food is sponsored by Pick n Pay. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet