(Bloomberg) — How Hydrogen Became the Hottest Thing in Green Energy: QuickTake Sales of new petrol and diesel cars will be banned by 2030, with hybrids exempt from that target date. Johnson will also back investment in hydrogen and nuclear power, alongside offshore wind and measures to make homes more energy efficient. On Tuesday, Johnson talked his top ministers through his 10-point plan for “a green industrial revolution,” which is expected to be published on Wednesday. Johnson told his cabinet the plan is “vital to achieving a green recovery, and delivering new jobs through public and private investment,” Slack said during a call with reporters on Tuesday. “The prime minister said it will drive down emissions by creating and using clean power and level up the country by pioneering new technology and energy supply in our towns and regions.” The premier also intends to use his commitment to tackling climate change to help build a strong partnership with U.S. President-elect Joe Biden. Britain is due to host next year’s COP26 global climate change summit in Scotland and has committed to a net zero carbon economy by 2050. Under the government’s plans, which were still being finalized ahead of publication, ministers are set to announce: How Hydrogen Became the Hottest Thing in Green Energy: QuickTake Britain needs both small and large-scale nuclear technologies to meet its climate change commitments, according to the plan being drafted by officials. That’s likely to be good news for Electricite de France SA and its Sizewell C plant – the only project still in the development pipeline after Hitachi Ltd exited a development in Wales. The government says it wants to see small-scale reactors built too. Small modular reactors have been promoted by the nuclear industry as a way to blend steady atomic generation with intermittent renewable energy. How Sizewell will be financed remains an open question with the government expected to draw a conclusion on its preferred financing model in the energy white paper before the end of the year. The hydrogen target is in line with industry demands. RenewableUK had urged the government to set a target of 5GW of renewable electrolyser capacity by 2030, rising to 10GW by 2035. –With assistance from Rachel Morison. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet