(FILE) The then leader of the 'Oromo Peoples Democratic Organization' (OPDO), now Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed looks on during a news conference in Aba Geda, Ethiopia, 02 November 2017 (reissued 23 June 2019). Ethiopia’s Amhara state leader Ambachew Mekonnen and his adviser were killed during a coup attempt in their state that was orchestrated by its top general, according to reports 23 June 2019. EPA-EFE/STR  The military engaged with forces loyal to the Tigray People’s Liberation Front in three areas on Wednesday and more operations are planned in the coming days, Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed said in a televised addressed. The Ethiopian Human Rights Commission urged lawmakers who are meeting Thursday to approve a state of emergency in Tigray to ensure humanitarian access to the region. “The commission is gravely concerned and closely monitoring the fast-developing security situation in Tigray and other parts of the country,” it said in a statement. “EHRC urges both federal and regional security forces to ensure the safety and security of civilians.” There was no immediate word on the number of casualties in the conflict, which erupted on Wednesday after Abiy accused the TPLF of orchestrating a raid on a federal army camp. Relations between the national and regional governments have deteriorated since Abiy took office in 2018 and sidelined the TPLF, once the pre-eminent power broker in Ethiopia. The fighting has unnerved investors. Yields on Ethiopia’s Eurobonds due 2024 jumped 64 basis points to 6.89% in London on Wednesday, the biggest increase in six months. United Nations Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and the U.S. urged both sides to de-escalate tensions. “We are saddened by the tragic loss of life and urge immediate action to restore the peace,” the State Department said in a statement on its website. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet