By Trevor Hunnicutt Introducing his planned national security team, Biden said his selection for Secretary of State, Antony Blinken, would rebuild morale and trust in the U.S. State Department. The team embodied his core belief “that America is strongest when it works with its allies,” Biden said. “It’s a team that reflects the fact that America is back, ready to lead the world, not retreat from it,” he told a news briefing in Wilmington, Delaware. Biden said had been struck in calls with world leaders “by how much they’re looking forward to the United States reasserting its historic role as a global leader over the Pacific, as well as the Atlantic, all across the world.” Biden vowed to strengthen alliances in the Asia-Pacific stressed the diplomatic experience of his team, which had, working with partners, secured “some of the most defining national security and diplomatic achievements in recent memory.” “That’s how we truly keep America safe. Without engaging in needless military conflicts, and our adversaries in check,” he said. During the election campaign, Biden vowed to reverse Trump’s decision to pull the United States out of the Paris accord on climate change, take a tough line on China’s expanding influence worldwide and rejoin the Iran nuclear accord if Tehran resumes strict compliance. In addition to Blinken, Biden’s team includes Jake Sullivan as national security adviser and Linda Thomas-Greenfield as U.S. ambassador to the United Nations. Biden, who is due to take office on Jan. 20, said he hoped the Republican-dominated Senate would give a prompt hearing to his nominees. Blinken also stressed the need to work with allies, who Trump often made a target for public criticism as part of his “America First” approach to foreign policy. “We can’t solve all the world’s problems alone” he said. “We need to be working with other countries, we need their cooperation, we need their partnership.” Thomas-Greenfield added: “I want to say to you: America is back. Multilateralism is back. Diplomacy is back.” (Reporting by Trevor Hunnicutt, Humeyra Pamuk and David Brunnstrom; Writing by Lisa Lambert and David Brunnstrom; Editing by Bill Berkrot and Alistair Bell) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet