epa08758178 A woman (C) wearing a face mask uses an umbrella as she gets to a bus stop as it rains in Nairobi, Kenya, 19 October 2020. In recent days the numbers of COVID-19 coronavirus cases have been on the rise around the country, after the government eased the coronavirus restrictions for economic activities including curfew hours, re-opening of schools and bars which is now feared may trigger a resurgence. EPA-EFE/Daniel Irungu  Kenyatta said that in October alone, the number of new confirmed coronavirus cases had risen by 15,000 and the East African nation reported about 300 deaths. “October has gone down as the most tragic month in our fight against COVID-19,” Kenyatta said, adding that the rate of infections from tests carried out had shot up to 16% in the month, four times what it was a month earlier. The government allowed bars to reopen on Sept. 28 and cut the nightly curfew by two hours. Schools partially reopened on Oct. 12. Kenyatta said he had also suspended all political rallies for 60 days and asked senior government officials to work virtually. The health ministry had raised concerns that a revival of political meetings at the start of October could have been among the causes of the virus’s spread. The national and county governments will also enforce an order that will allow them to deny services to anyone who visits their offices without a mask on, he said. As of Nov. 3, Kenya had a total 57,093 coronavirus cases, 1039 deaths and 37,846 recoveries, health ministry data showed. (Reporting by Additional reporting by George Obulutsa; Editing by Alison Williams and Giles Elgood) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet