* Biden: ‘It’s clear that we’re winning enough states’ * Trump campaign says it is suing in key states * Biden holds lead in national popular vote * No incumbent U.S. president has lost since 1992 By Trevor Hunnicutt and Steve Holland Victories in those Midwestern states gave Biden, a former vice president who has spent five decades in public life, a critical boost in the race to obtain 270 electoral votes in the state-by-state Electoral College needed to win the White House. Trump, who won both states in 2016, now has fewer options to secure a second four-year term. With the count still under way, he has falsely declared victory, accused the Democrats of trying to steal the election and vowed to fight the states in court. “It’s clear that we’re winning enough states to reach (the) 270 electoral votes needed to win the presidency,” Biden, appearing with his running mate Kamala Harris, said in his home state of Delaware. “I’m not here to declare that we’ve won. But I am here to report that when the count is finished we believe we will be the winners.” Trump has spent months seeking to undermine the credibility of the voting process in case he lost and accusing Democrats, without evidence, of seeking to steal the election. His campaign fought to keep Trump’s chances alive with a lawsuits in Michigan and Pennsylvania to stop vote counting. It demanded a recount in Wisconsin. The campaign asked the U.S. Supreme Court to allow Trump to join a pending lawsuit filed by Pennsylvania Republicans over whether the battleground state, which was still counting hundreds of thousands of mail-in ballots, should be permitted to accept late-arriving ballots sent by Election Day on Tuesday. The maneuvers amounted to a broad effort to contest the results of a still undecided election a day after millions of Americans went to the polls during the coronavirus pandemic that has upended daily life. While fighting to stop the count in states where he feared losing, Trump blasted news organizations that projected losses in Arizona and Nevada, states he thought he should be winning. Biden said every vote must be counted. “No one’s going to take our democracy away from us, not now, not ever. America’s come too far. America’s fought too many battles, America’s endured too much to ever let that happen,” he said. Trump is trying to avoid becoming the first incumbent U.S. president to lose a re-election bid since George H.W. Bush in 1992. Biden won Michigan by 67,000 votes, or 1.2%, while he was ahead in Wisconsin by just over 20,000 ballots, or 0.6%, according to figures from Edison Research, which projected Biden as the winner in Michigan. Several news outlets projected Biden as the winner in Wisconsin, though Edison did not, citing the pending recount. Wisconsin law allows a candidate to request a recount if the margin is below 1%, which the Trump campaign immediately said it would do. In response to the Michigan lawsuit, Ryan Jarvi, a spokesman for the state attorney general, said the elections had been “conducted transparently.” Voting concluded as scheduled on Tuesday night, but many states routinely take days to finish counting ballots. There was a surge in mail-in ballots nationally amid the pandemic. Other closely contested states including Arizona, Georgia, Nevada and North Carolina were still counting votes, leaving the national election outcome uncertain. At the moment, not including Wisconsin, Biden leads Trump 243 to 213 in Electoral College votes, which are largely based on a state’s population. THE PANDEMIC EFFECT The contentious aftermath capped a vitriolic campaign that unfolded amid a pandemic that has killed more than 233,000 people in the United States and left millions more jobless. The country has also grappled with months of unrest involving protests over racism and police brutality. Supporters of both candidates expressed anger, frustration and fear with little clarity on when the election would be resolved. Trump held a narrow lead in North Carolina, while his lead dwindled in Georgia and Pennsylvania. Without Wisconsin and Michigan, he would have to win all three as well as either Arizona or Nevada, where Biden was leading in the latest vote counts. Biden would be only the second Democratic presidential candidate to win Arizona in 72 years. Trump won the state in 2016. In Pennsylvania, Trump’s lead dropped to around 196,000 votes as officials gradually worked their way through millions of mail-in ballots, which were seen as likely to benefit Biden. Trump campaign manager Bill Stepien called the president the winner in Pennsylvania, even though state officials had not completed the count. Biden said he felt “very good” about his chances in the state. In the nationwide popular vote, Biden on Wednesday was comfortably ahead of Trump, with about 3 million more votes. Trump won the 2016 election over Democrat Hillary Clinton after winning crucial battleground states even though she drew about 3 million more votes nationwide. Legal experts had warned the election could get bogged down in state-by-state litigation over a host of issues, including whether states can include late-arriving ballots that were mailed by Election Day. Both campaigns have marshaled teams of lawyers in preparation for any disputes. In the Pennsylvania case in which the Trump campaign sought to intervene, the U.S. Supreme Court previously allowed the state to move forward with a plan to count ballots mailed by Election Day that arrive up to three days later. But some conservative justices suggested they would be willing to reconsider the matter, and state officials planned to segregate those ballots as a precaution. Ahead of the election, Trump had said he wanted his latest U.S. Supreme Court appointee, Amy Coney Barrett, confirmed by the Senate in case the court had to hear any electoral dispute. Democrats had criticized the president for appearing to suggest he expected Barrett to rule in his favor. Trump has repeatedly said without evidence that widespread mail-in voting would lead to fraud, although U.S. election experts say fraud is very rare. Trump continued to make unsubstantiated attacks on the vote-counting process on Twitter on Wednesday. Both Facebook and Twitter flagged multiple posts from the president for promoting misleading claims. “We were getting ready to win this election. Frankly, we did win this election,” Trump said before launching an extraordinary attack on the electoral process by a sitting president. “This is a major fraud on our nation. We want the law to be used in a proper manner. So we’ll be going to the U.S. Supreme Court. We want all voting to stop.” Trump provided no evidence to back up his claim of fraud and did not explain how he would fight the results at the Supreme Court. The election will also decide which party controls the U.S. Congress for the next two years, and the Democratic drive to win control of the Senate appeared to be falling short. Democrats had flipped two Republican-held seats while losing one of their own, and five other races remained undecided – Alaska, Michigan, North Carolina and two in Georgia. (Reporting by Trevor Hunnicutt in Wilmington, Delaware, and Steve Holland and Jeff Mason in Washington Additional reporting by Jason Lange and Susan Heavey in Washington; Patricia Zengerle in Raleigh, North Carolina; and Rich McKay in Atlanta Writing by Joseph Ax and Jeff Mason Editing by Paul Thomasch, Will Dunham and Howard Goller) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 3 First world democracy. First world election mess! Threats of legal action! All whilst Covid-19 is accelating (again) across this world power (is it?). America has lost itself. Fighting itself. Killing itself! It appears the Trump campaign wishes to direct crucial and urgent electoral decisions towards a Republican friendly Supreme Court. From a friend and Democrat in the USA:
“I have done everything I could – I have given both time and money and I voted. I have used what miniscule voice I have to challenge this degeneration. As an ardent student of history, I know exactly what’s on the line. I am deeply sorry that too few of my fellow Americans obviously share that understanding. In a very real sense, the damage has already been done. A good portion of the American public has proven themselves to be so easily manipulated and conned that they would elect a complete failure like Donald Trump to the office of the president because he looked like a tough guy on a reality TV show, a fact our enemies have already taken full advantage of – both inside and outside of our country. That vulnerability (the ignorance of the Fox News watching Trump supporter) has risen to the level of being a threat to our national security. Whether Biden wins or loses, those people aren’t going to wake up informed or educated tomorrow. No matter what happens today, tomorrow we have to address the staggering gullibility of too many Americans”