Software as a competitive advantage As the digitisation of industries and e-commerce expands globally, the world’s biggest software developers, such as Alphabet, Microsoft, and Amazon, have impacted the business models of companies of all scales across the globe. We need to be able to interact with them, leverage their capabilities, and also compete with them.   For us to compete globally in a digital era, we need to be able to build software as well as they do, while ensuring that ethical design and development considerations are top of mind. “At iOCO, we speak of “Devanything”, because literally, anything is possible with modern technology, software, data, analytics and integration.  Software is no longer about a business requirement spec that gets handed to an IT team. It has become an integrated, continuous process that enables business to develop creative and innovative solutions.” At a high level, every modern CEO needs assurance that their organisation is able to deliver on three crucial components: design, agility, and interconnection. Design Consumers in the digital age have become far more demanding in pursuit of the frictionless experiences and instant gratification that digital can offer.  Companies need to place customers at the epicentre, first gaining insight into their needs and problems and then deploying human-centred problem-solving and design techniques to solve their biggest business challenges. This ‘design thinking’ approach redefines how we build products and customer experiences. Software designed to solve real problems, and for the customer, is a critical success factor. Agility The only strategic response to the accelerating pace of technological change is to build radical agility into your software development processes.  Agility is, increasingly, the only meaningful currency when building resilient, anti-fragile organisations that can adapt to change. CEOs need the assurance they are developing software in ways that will truly allow their business to deliver products, features and processes, from design through to development and testing, at a predictable cost and at the scale and pace expected in the digital era. Forming strategic partnerships with software development companies that can understand and translate end-user requirements, and that can scale up or down in response to immediate needs while delivering exceptional software, allows companies to quickly pivot and respond to strategic digital opportunities. Interconnection The third crucial component – interconnection – is deeply connected to agility. The new world of business is fuelled by the ability to rapidly connect internally, with partners, and with other third-party networks to offer new products, services, and business processes.  New customer experiences are being delivered and enhanced by accessing specific data and services (e.g. location-based services, and operations) available from third parties. To truly lead in a digital age, your CIO should be creating an API-first organisation that builds software based on its ability to connect. Adopting an API-first philosophy and having the platforms to facilitate the smooth exchange of APIs with other businesses, can revolutionise the quality of products and innovation, and rapidly accelerate your time to market. Digital transformation has earned its place on the board agenda.  Practically, CEOs need to know they have a range of critical capabilities in place to ensure they are able to develop world-class experiences for their customers, and automation and enablement for their businesses that will allow them to remain relevant and competitive.  Strategic focus on design, agility and interconnection will ensure they are building platform businesses fit to compete in a modern digital world. DM Solve with iOCO  Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet