“As a high net worth individual, you also have the opportunity to invest in this sought-after country and become a resident. Through the EB-5 Investor Programme, by investing $900 000 in a designated Targeted Employment Area (TEA), you are guaranteed Green Card status, while your wealth is secured in an active investment in the United States and you are eligible for a US passport after 5 years,” explains Stuart Ferguson, CEO of American Dream. “Immigration into the US is a complicated and highly regulated process. We have seen the recent banning and restrictions on a number of other visa categories like H1-b, J1, L1 and H2-b that used to be popular amongst South Africans. By investing in the EB-5 Investor Programme, you have a streamlined process to follow and once the application has been successful, you are able to live in America with very little-to-no restrictions or the threat of being sent back home. The hassle is eliminated even more so by going through the American Dream team, as we have a proven 100% success rate and are able to connect you with the necessary experts, provide key advice, and facilitate the process step-by-step,” shares Ferguson. As an American Dream EB-5 investor, you are securing your wealth and hedging your rand against a strong currency. Once your application is approved, you need to remain invested to fulfil your sustainment criteria, which includes the retention of your investment for a further period of 2 years. Says Chris Immelman, head of Pam Golding International “We have partnered with American Dream to help ensure our clients can secure an alternate future with reputable individuals who have a proven track record. American Dream boast a 100% success rate, facilitate each step of the way, as well as have immense knowledge of the processes and the requirements”. The EB-5 Investor Visa gives you and your family, including dependent children under the age of 21, the right to live, work, study or build a business anywhere in the United States. After a 5-year period, you and your family then have the right to become US citizens. For families with school-going children, this programme allows your children access to leading top-ranking schools. That’s not to mention the quality of tertiary education you will have on your doorstep.  America is home to the likes of Harvard, Massachusetts and Stanford Universities which are 3 of the top universities in the world. Healthcare is also the top of every family’s priority list and America’s is one of the best. In the 2020 Best Countries report, the US public healthcare system ranked in the top 15. Once you are a US passport holder, you have the benefit of visa-free travel to approximately 160 countries. We are seeing a faster adjudication process – with our current processing timeframe dropping from approximately 20 months to 13 months, the EB-5 Investor Programme is a streamlined approach to US residency. South Africans enjoy the advantage of visa availability and priority adjudication. DM  To live your American Dream, get in touch with our team and secure your future. For further information on the US EB-5 Programme, please contact Theresa Fernandez on international@pamgolding.co.za or visit our website Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet