“Financial crime, including money laundering, is among the biggest and most difficult challenges that banks face around the world,” Nasdaq Chief Executive Officer Adena Friedman said in a presentation. “Regulators are becoming more demanding of banks, brokerages, fintechs and other financial intermediaries as the frontline defense against criminals using the financial system to fund their illicit activities.” About $2 trillion is laundered a year, and the $12.5 billion market for combating financial crime is expected to grow 17% through 2024, Nasdaq said. The purchase fits a strategy laid out at the company’s investor day earlier this month, when Friedman said it was seeking acquisitions to provide more software and analytics to the financial industry. The exchange operator already provides trade and market surveillance for its clients. Many banks are using old systems that aren’t very effective at detecting money laundering and financial crime, Valerie Bannert-Thurner, a senior vice president at Nasdaq, said in an interview. “It’s such a big problem, fines are huge and it’s a big worry for CEOs for banks, and it has to be solved better.” Nasdaq shares rose 2.3% to $125.60 as of 12:49 p.m. in New York. They’re up 17% this year. The deal is expected to boost earnings per share starting in 2022, the company said. Evercore Inc. and JPMorgan Chase & Co. were the lead advisers to Nasdaq, which was also advised by Bank of America Corp., Goldman Sachs Group Inc., Morgan Stanley and Toronto-Dominion Bank. Verafin was advised by William Blair & Co. Verafin’s headquarters will remain in St. John’s, and its executive leadership team will continue to run the company, according to the statement. The deal is expected to be completed in the first quarter of next year. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet