“If it happens, it will happen, so I’m not worried at all,” he told reporters in footage broadcast by eNCA television. The Daily Maverick and News24 news websites reported that the warrant was issued for Magashule over a contract awarded while we was premier of the Free State province. Magashule is one of the top six officials of the governing ANC, in charge of the day-to-day running of the party. An ANC spokesman did not answer his phone when called by Reuters for comment. A police spokesman in the Free State province referred questions to the country’s elite Hawks police unit. A Hawks spokesperson said: “I don’t know about any arrest warrant.” (Reporting by Alexander Winning and Emma Rumney; Editing by Olivia Kumwenda-Mtambo and Jon Boyle) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 3 A Luta Continua – and so the struggle starts to pay dividends, or maybe at least accrue them. With such endemic corruption, we queried why the banks were so tardy in their response, especially with their directors and risk executives being open to R100m fines and/or 10 years in jail (yes, POCA and POCADOTARA were both enforced via on-line multiple choice questions to all bank staff in the late 90’s) – and then they found a moral spine, decided to forego the profits and closed the Gupta accounts. So, what could the legal profession do in support – could all the silks/advocates or even the Law profession take a stand and advise that they would not defend such corrupt individuals, stand aside, take the moral higher ground, and let all the under 30 years of age (still to become experienced) practitioners try to defend these crooks !! (Pierre dV, a little guidance, please) More fake news? A Hawks spokesperson: “I don’t know about any arrest warrant.” He should be worried. A great deal of research has gone into this investigation and a guy in his position is not arrested unless the charge is watertight.