xxRoast leg of lamb with cumin, paprika, rosemary and lemon, topped with almonds and mint-lemon yoghurt. (Photo: Tony Jackman) Ingredients 1 x 1.5 kg leg of lamb, bone-in 2 Tbsp butter at room temperature 2 Tbsp olive oil 1 Tbsp fresh rosemary needles, chopped very finely 2 tsp ground cumin 1 tsp paprika 3 garlic cloves, minced Juice of half a lemon Zest of 1 lemon (see below for what to do with the juice) 50 g almonds, toasted and then crushed Salt to taste For the mint-lemon yoghurt: 100 ml plain yoghurt 2 Tbsp chopped fresh mint 1 garlic clove, finely chopped The juice of that lemon back there Salt and pepper to taste Method Mix together the butter, olive oil, spices, minced garlic and rosemary to make a paste. Make incisions in the lamb in about 20 places and pack the paste on with clean hands, massaging it into the meat. Salt the joint all over and place in a preheated 220℃ oven for 15 minutes, then turn the heat down to 160℃ or 170℃ and roast for up to three hours. Baste every half hour and, after the first half hour, also squeeze the juice of half a lemon over it. While the lamb is cooking, mix together the yoghurt, juice of 1 lemon, chopped garlic, chopped mint, salt and pepper, blitz till smooth, and keep aside till needed. When the meat is done, remove the roast to another pan and keep warm. Reduce the pan juices down on the hob a little, and spoon off any excess fat. Sprinkle lemon zest over it and scatter the chopped almonds over. Serve and carve at the table, being sure to spoon some of the almonds and zest onto each serving, and share out the pan juices with each serving. Finally, dollop a tablespoonful of lemon-mint yoghurt on top. DM168/TGIFood Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Send your Lockdown Recipes to tony@dailymaverick.co.za with a hi-resolution horizontal (landscape) photo. Thank God It’s Food is sponsored by Pick n Pay. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet