Paysage intérieur, 1993, Acrylic on canvas, 146 x 114cm, Credit: ©Breyten Breytenbach. Courtesy of the artist and Stevenson, Cape Town and Johannesburg. Editors’ note to readers: The automated sound device that accompanies articles in the Daily Maverick is to assist readers who are blind or have reading difficulties. It is not designed for poetry. Where possible, we advise you to read the poems rather than listen. In the presence of death poets speak with particular urgency. Our own impending deaths or those of others generate a language of mystery while the things of the world, in their poignant ordinariness, call us back to life and the known. Breyten Breytenbach is a magician of language, particularly but not only in Afrikaans. His linguistic and rhythmic virtuosity, surreal painterly descriptions and shifting registers, from the tender to the excoriating, illuminate dark corners of experience. The poems below dance and shimmer, or crystallize like frozen shards. Dancing invites us to contemplate what it might mean “to forsake the earth”. While we do not know “..who or what goes away..” the experience will be a solitary one, accompanied perhaps, only by “dancing spaces” and then “a wind silence.” The steely elegy The Nomadic Conversation, an exchange with Mahmoud Darwish, recalls the modesty, clarity and political commitment of that great Palestinian poet. His exemplary instructions about how to be remembered when he dies include “..no grand display” and no flag draped over his coffin. He allows “at best a blinding quatrain,” music, laughter, wine: “just this, just this”. In It is called grieving for the present, one of two Afrikaans poems reprinted here, the speaker confronts us with a set of ambiguities: when we die, the present and everything we love dies for us; when others die, we die for them too. And thus in the presence of anticipated loss “nou weet jy hoe dit is/om te lewe.” The previously unpublished poem en waarvan sal die hart bly sing? with its affecting repetitions, rhymes and half-rhymes, asks more unanswerable questions about finding “daardie laaste lyn” to record the inevitable relinquishing of words and the loss of the enigmatic visual world. *** Dancing  it is going to be tough to forsake this earth (but who or what goes away?) the terrible spaces of dispossession always yours alone  dark hill over there like a bowl of shimmering light with trees still bearing the signs of wind in joint and wound and miracle of breath, and here a mudslide slopes and plains and black vegetation  all suffering is distance – how could you know of people in the mud? what is lived? what seen, heard or merely imagined, and what matters?  when walls crumble and the unimpeded cry opens in you a pealing, shimmering incantation of dancing spaces – a wind silence  From Voices from the Middle World, Haymarket Books, 2009 *** The Nomadic Conversation With Mahmoud Darwish  when you die, Mahmoud when your aorta thrashing like a purple snake bursts because the lines can no longer carry the perfect metaphor and your heart as poem spurts the final blood in that hospital of foreign parts of the barbarian land, when your heart at last could be a wingless bird  a moon starts growing above the island among slithering clouds of this ‘little winter season’ which soon will spill dark ink in long verses over the waves so that crows and goats and dirt-poor children in song may plash in the mud as if celebrating liberation  three, four, five days and nights invisible by day, invisible like dying or the movement surfacing in a stanza words decay in the night when times takes its time as reaper over the fields of the body  until the loose fleece fades and shadows over the naked land fall away like tufts of flesh and the moon bloats virginally full  a sloop of bone your skull, Mahmoud  *  cover me quickly, you said no wailing and no grand display write at best a blinding quatrain so that the object of your poem’s pain may be eclipsed there’s no identity just a soughing space of shiver all is movement until it stops moving to sing, time is the timeless lover over image patterns of the skin  drape no flag over my coffin, you said a flag is to have a shirt cut from cloth for the homeless a flag is the rag with which the clown teaches a child in the circus of color and the blue of betrayal our flag blows free to remember the Nakba when olive trees were wrapped in dead fire while bird coops of verse were written for us  just this, just this  let there be music, you said a feast with much laughter for my friends and a glass of wine lifted high to the day as red as the ringing throb and wash of a heart  From Voices from the Middle World, Haymarket Books, 2009 *** It is called grieving for the present “Longing for ancient times and grieving for the present, my heart is exhausted.” Ryokan, “Reading the ‘Record of Eihei Dōgen’”  nou weet jy wat dit is om dood te gaan: dat alles en almal en dit en dié hier vir wie jy lief was sonder om daarvan bewus te wees moes sterwe tewyl jy nog leef  en nou terugkom in musiek die effense blaarbeweging tussen kyk en sien die randjie van ’n gliplag oor die malligheid van die lewe  nou weet jy hoe dit is om te lewe: dat alles en almal en dit en dié daardie daar vir wie jy lief is nie daarvan weet nie maar wéét hulle sal lewe terwyl jy nog sterf  From op weg na kû, Human and Rousseau, 2019. *** en waarvan sal die hart bly sing?  so lank soek ek al maar het ek ooit regtig gesoek ?  na daardie laaste lyne waaraan ek my op kan hang  waarmee die lus na dood my sal vang om die oë toe te maak  en die oë oop kan maak om blind die lig te ontvang ?  dit is dan so voor die hand liggend in pyn se synkronkels omlyn met stilte  want wat is ‘n boom tog sonder die hond ?  en wat is sneeu as dit nie was vir ‘n hemel ?  en wat sou die hand kon wees en weeg sonder beweging ? DM/ MC/ ML Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.