(Photo: Sean Calitz)  Just fry or bake your nuggets and warm up your dipping sauce and you’re done. The nuggets can even be made in batches and frozen, ready for when you have those unexpected guests or the teens have a snack attack. Ingredients Serves 4-6 4 large chicken breasts 5g fresh chopped Rosemary Zest of ½ Lemon. 200g corn flake crumbs 60g finely grated hard cheese – like Parmagiano Salt & Pepper to taste 6 eggs 200g flour 60g Corn flour Method Cut chicken into roughly 4x2cm strips. Add the cheese, zest, corn flour, herbs and spices to the flour and mix Dip the chicken strips in the flour mix, then egg, then flour mix again and then egg again, then the corn flake crumbs. Place in the fridge to chill for 30 mins. You can, either, fry them in hot oil until golden or bake them in a preheated oven, on a baking rack with a drizzle of olive oil at 200 deg C for 15mins or until golden and crisp. Black olive ratatouille Ingredients 100ml white vinegar 200g brown sugar 300g plum tomatoes 200g finely chopped carrots 100g Pitted black olives 200g sliced zucchini 1 Aubergine Chopped 200g Cauliflower Chopped 2 finely chopped white onions 5g Sage chopped 2 bay leaves 5g fresh chopped rosemary Method Blanche the slower cooking vegetables in salted water for 5 mins. (carrots, cauliflower, zucchini) Brown the onions in a little olive oil and then add the tomatoes, aubergines and olives and fry for about 2 minutes with the herbs. Add the rest of the veg and other ingredients, bring to the boil and then turn down to simmer down for 15-20 minutes until a nice chunky sauce forms. Serve in little dipping bowls with the nuggets, while still hot. DM/TGIFood Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Send your Lockdown Recipes to tony@dailymaverick.co.za with a hi-resolution horizontal (landscape) photo. Thank God It’s Food is sponsored by Pick n Pay. Gordon Wright is a cook and author of Veld to Fork and Karoo Food. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.