LAS VEGAS, NEVADA - MAY 31: People attend a service in a chapel at the International Church of Las Vegas on May 31, 2020 in Las Vegas, Nevada. The services were held in-person for the first time since March 15th because of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic. Places of worship and other high-density indoor gatherings are limited to a maximum of 50 people attending a service at a time and strict social distancing of at least six feet as part of Nevada Gov. Steve Sisolak's Phase Two reopening of the economy. (Photo: Ethan Miller/Getty Images) The decision taken by the National Coronavirus Command Council and announced by President Cyril Ramaphosa on 26 May and contained in the regulations published by the Minister of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Dr Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma, on 28 May that places of worship will be allowed to resume religious services of up to 50 people when the country moves to Alert Level 3 on 1 June 2020 is a serious public health concern. Religious worship is an important part of the spiritual and emotional well-being of millions of South Africans and the right to freedom of religion is contained in our Constitution. The decision, however, to allow religious gatherings of up to 50 individuals compromises one of the few effective public health tools currently at our disposal against Covid-19, namely physical (social) distancing and is a setback for the country’s Covid-19 public health response. There is growing evidence globally of SARS-CoV-2 transmission during religious gatherings where a few infected individuals transmit the virus to large numbers of attendees, some of whom die. Six examples are listed below: It has been noted by Yong and his colleagues who investigated two church clusters in Singapore that there are certain characteristics of religious gatherings that lend themselves to transmission of SARS-CoV-2: Ramaphosa’s address and the regulations published on 28 May make reference to the reopening of places of worship being subject to restrictions. Concerns regarding the implementations of these measures include the following: The decision to allow religious gatherings of up to 50 people has several public health and health system implications with respect to the Covid-19 response: Based on the public health implications of this decision, it is not immediately clear why it was taken. The lockdown regulations under Level 5 and Level 4 have forced religious bodies to think of different ways to ensure worship can continue in safe ways. Television and radio have been used to reach people with religious programming for decades. Support from government and other stakeholders for such alternatives to continue should, therefore, be encouraged and forms of worship that rely on sharing common physical spaces avoided. It is our view that Ramaphosa and the National Coronavirus Command Council should reconsider and reverse their decision to allow religious gatherings at Alert Level 3 and Dlamini Zuma should revoke the said regulation in the interest of the health of the South African population. DM/MC The College of Public Health Medicine (CPHM) is one of the Constituent Colleges of the Colleges of Medicine of South Africa. It has over 160 fellows distributed across the country, actively involved in contributions to controlling the spread of Covid-19 in South Africa. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.