* NBA Finals will conclude no later tan Oct. 12 * Playoffs will follow best-of-seven format (Adds confirmation) By Frank Pingue The plan would see 22 of the NBA’s 30 teams play eight games to determine a 16-team playoff field that would follow the traditional post-season format with four best-of-seven series that would crown a champion no later than Oct. 12. “While the COVID-19 pandemic presents formidable challenges, we are hopeful of finishing the season in a safe and responsible manner based on strict protocols now being finalized with public health officials and medical experts,” NBA Commissioner Adam Silver said in a news release. The league said approval from its Board of Governors, which came on the day originally scheduled for the start of the NBA Finals, is the first formal step among the many required to resume the season. According to ESPN, the vote on the format was 29-1, with the Portland Trail Blazes voting against the proposal. All games, practices and housing would be at the ESPN Wide World of Sports Complex which is inside the Orlando resort and has multiple hotels and arenas, and would allow the league to limit outside exposure. The NBA was the first North American sports league to suspend its season due to the COVID-19 pandemic after one of its players tested positive for the new coronavirus in mid-March. The 22 returning teams would be comprised of the eight teams from each of the two conferences currently in playoff positions plus the six clubs that are six games or fewer behind the eighth seed in their respective conferences. If everything goes according to plan, the NBA said the 2020-21 season would begin on Dec. 1. The league also said it plans to hold its 2020 NBA Draft Lottery to determine the order of the first 14 selections on Aug. 25. Lottery teams would be comprised of the eight clubs that do not participate in the restart and the six that go to Florida but do not qualify for the playoffs. The actual NBA Draft, typically held in June, is now scheduled for Oct. 15. (Reporting by Frank Pingue in Toronto, Editing by Franklin Paul/Pritha Sarkar/Ken Ferris) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.