A shorter working life, lower expected future returns and lower incomes in retirement mean that pensions need to last much longer than previously anticipated, says the writer. (Photo: Rawpixel) Bruce Lee, a Hong Kong actor, martial artist and philosopher once said: “A goal is not always meant to be reached, it often serves as something to aim at.” This quote was used by retirement planning financial adviser, Estee Visser, in a Linkedin post, who then also added one of her own: “If you reach your goals, you’re not trying hard enough.” The first question you need to ask is: Do I want to retire? There are many reasons why you may want to or need to avoid retiring. Alexander Forbes research on what is called “normal retirement age” shows that reasons given by employees are often not logical. In research done in 2013 and again this year by Alexander Forbes principal consultant, Belinda Sullivan, it was found that the challenge to retirement age is not so much the Pension Funds Act, but employers, who incorrectly see the cost of extended retirement as a perceived issue. At that time the average retirement age was 61.4 for 2019 (up on 60.3 in 2012) showing some improvement. But it still means that most people will still be retiring early, for whatever reason as the average normal retirement age for private retirement was 63. Sullivan says the reality is that individuals are retiring earlier, but the irony is individuals have more time to live, but less time to save — a shorter working life, lower expected future returns and lower incomes in retirement, which now means that pensions need to last much longer than previously anticipated. Sullivan says individuals now need to work as long as possible to fund their lifestyles post-retirement. More than half of the 37 countries that make up the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) have increased the retirement age from 65 to 67, with the longer-term intention to increase this age beyond 67 to target 75 by 2050. Sullivan says arguments in South Africa for later retirement include: Listed below are some of the most common situations that might apply to your decision-making on when to retire: If you don’t have a choice on your retirement date and haven’t saved enough to retire confidently, what do you do? Many people are forced into retirement by retrenchment, illness, infirmity or the date specified by their fund. Here are five things that you need to consider: There are many ways to find new job opportunities. For example, there is an online company called 50 Plus-Skills and Retirement Network that has built a community where people aged 50 and over can profile their skills and promote their services to others. Lynda Smith, the managing director, says that the Covid-19 virus has created unprecedented times. “This is a scary and difficult time for people over the age of 50, who are losing their jobs and who cannot afford to be retired early or retrenched. There are also people, like restaurant owners, who are now out there looking for jobs as well.” The aim of 50 Plus-Skills is to help people in this age bracket to continue to live their lives fully. “We want to urge people of 50-plus to find new ways of working, connecting with and providing their wisdom, experience and skill to business, civil society, academic institutions, non-profit organisations and government,” says Smith. “Some people still need to earn extra money. Some simply want to work with many doing a lot of volunteer work.” You can join the network, which gives you the following benefits: The opportunities are incredibly wide. Such websites provide opportunities for mentors (both paid and unpaid) to help people in incubator or enterprise developments, supporting and coaching; or providing technical skills in various industries; or facilitating workshops to develop skills; or be part of a team of advisers who nurture and support young people. DM/BM A series of reports written by Bruce Cameron, the semi-retired founding editor of Personal Finance at Independent Newspapers, that cover the effects of Covid-19 on pensioners including research undertaken by Alexander Forbes on retirement income in South Africa. Cameron is co-author of the best-selling book, The Ultimate Guide to Retirement in South Africa. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.