Louise Haggar/Composite: The Reading List This recipe comes from my father-in-law, George. My relationship with George didn’t exactly get off to the best start. I’d been dating Jon for only about three months when he went back home to Canada for his sister’s wedding and decided to upstage the bride by coming out at her nuptials. Sort of. In fact, it was Jon’s little sister, Jackie who dropped the bomb while driving back from the airport after dropping him off to fly back to Europe. “So, what about Jon having a boyfriend?” To which George nearly crashed the car.  So it took a while for George to be won over by my winning smile and dashing looks. It actually took about five years for him to look me in the eye. Fathers and sons. I never really had that sort of relationship with my dad. I never had the chance. Even though George and I didn’t get on, I knew he loved his son. I knew how difficult it was for him and that he wasn’t comfortable with me or his son’s choices, but he loved him and was prepared to put that first. Something I know my father had done for me. On our wedding day, seven years later, George gave the “father of the bride” speech and there wasn’t a dry eye in the house. It made me wonder what my dad would have said. Would he have been able to speak so openly? So lovingly? I’d like to think so, because both men loved their sons. Both men put their son’s feelings above their own. Unconditional love – that’s the recipe. Whenever I feel under the weather, Jon makes me this soup. It’s gentle and comforting. It’s a great big bowl of unconditional love. Avgolemono Chicken Soup Serves 4
Cooking time 1 hour 40 minutes, plus 30 minutes cooling Method Time-saving hack and tip Use a rotisserie chicken and store-bought stock if short on time. If you are making the stock and you have any left over, you can freeze it or it will keep in the refrigerator for up to a week to use in another recipe. DM/ML There’s No Taste Like Home by John Partridge is published by Mitchell Beazley, R475. Visit The Reading List for South African book news – including recipes! – daily. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.