Week12: A crisis such as the Covid-19 pandemic creates a perfect opportunity for those who wish to cause confusion, chaos and public harm, and mis- and disinformation enable them to do just that. Another week, more complaints from the fruitcakes, the nasty and the evil. Like the virus, we might win big battles, but the war is far from over. This week we reflect on some of the most common topics of disinformation. Complaints by topic The intentional sharing of false, inaccurate, or misleading information designed, presented, and promoted online to intentionally cause public harm, commonly known as “disinformation”, is a complex issue. Disinformation, and the sharing of it, is not a new phenomenon, but its spread, access to it, and reliance on it seem to have spiked in recent years. Using the Real411 platform we have analysed disinformation trends that have largely focused on Covid-19. Over the past 12 weeks, Media Monitoring Africa (MMA) has provided weekly insights into the trends in disinformation complaints we have received on the platform. As of 21 August 2020, 648 complaints have been submitted to the platform. The complaints that get submitted on the platform also get “tagged” for topic. This allows us to start analysis of the themes, topics and issues dominating the disinformation trends. The graph below shows the most common topics (according to tagged complaints). The data shows that unsurprisingly, Covid-19, Masks, Conspiracy Theory and Covid-19 deaths have dominated the complaints submitted. Topics such as the alcohol ban, xenophobia, racism and #putsouthafricafirst also feature in the top topics.    This week, we are having a look at these trends over the last 6 weeks. To get an idea we have pulled complaints from 1 July to 21 August. Unsurprisingly, the complaints have been dominated by disinformation about Covid-19 generally. As to be expected with the announcement that masks were compulsory, we saw a spike in the number of cases about masks, then there was the usual smattering of complaints about conspiracy theories and Covid-19 deaths. Of course, the problem with conspiracy theories is that there is one for each scenario, so some are asserting that the number of people who have died as a result of Covid-19 is either grossly underestimated – and there are loads more – or that the whole thing is a hoax and nobody has died of Covid-19. What the complaints also indicate is a degree of mutual dependence on the news agenda by those who spread disinformation. The lockdown, and in particular the ban on sales of alcohol, saw the alcohol lobby go into overdrive and over the period 1 July to 21 August there were just over 1,850 stories about the alcohol ban. Some misinformation in the period focused on the alcohol ban. This week a few examples of complaints on the key themes: Complaint #689  Complaint 689 purported to be a Pick n Pay advert indicating that people would be able to purchase alcohol from 15 August. Even though the ban was lifted a few days later, at the time the complaint was submitted it was not true, and may well have caused some level of harm had people gone to the shop that had “advertised” and then been turned away. While perhaps it was intended as mischief, people who create mis- and disinformation ignore the real-world harm that can come from their actions. Complaint #697  697 is fairly typical of a mixture of spreading lies about mask-wearing mixed with an effort to insult and belittle those who do wear masks. The creator is suggesting that wearing a mask to look after your own health and help protect others means you are less intelligent and following the herd.  No evidence is advanced as to why this might be. While there is certainly often value in not conforming to behaviour because everyone else has, there are a number of basic behaviours we all normally take for granted that are in the best interest of all people to follow. Labelling the idea of not wearing a mask as somehow rebellious is not only pointless but potentially harmful. Complaint #442  442 is a classic “anecdote” as evidence of reality, and an example of how the deaths relating to Covid-19 have been overstated. What’s interesting about these examples is that they speak to us not as experts who might claim to be doctors, or as fruitcakes who claim to have done research, but they seek to have us, the reader, identify. “My personal experience was xyz.” They speak to people in their immediate circle. They talk about how two people in one day lost people in their inner circle – “her dad” and “a dear friend”. Our tendency is to believe it because few people generally lie about losing people they really care about. If you are a caring person you will likely feel sad and can imagine losing someone close. The content then uses that powerful feeling to gloss over the leap in evidence and logic, that because two people passed in this way the government is therefore lying about all deaths and massively fabricating the numbers. It’s a clever but disturbing way of using empathy to lure us in and trick us into falling for misinformation. Complaint #705  705 is another common one that seeks to use people’s financial distress as a hook to lure them in and hopefully either give away their details or their money. To be clear, there is precious little difference between the people that run these scams and those who steal the millions from the Covid-19 contracts – a special place in hell awaits them.  This particular complaint is set up as a legitimate conversation, rather than being an isolated post which is less likely to be believed. Complaint #577  And then we have those who seek to divide, and perpetuate racist and sexist stereotypes. In 577 we have an example of misinformation mixed with raw racism. The user asserts “some hard truths in this tweet” as though what follows might be uncomfortable but true. Nope, the reason people will feel uncomfortable when they read it is that it is sickeningly racist and sexist.  Of course, those who hold views that black men are born rapists, might find the misinformation resonating with their own biases. Common to this revolting content, and other comments, is how they work on our emotions to build legitimacy and or credibility, and at the same time how emotions are played to wash over fundamental weaknesses in the argument being presented. This is not a new technique. Advertisers, politicians and the like have been using the tool since the dawn of their professions. Disinformation works because it plays on fear, anxiety, uncertainty, anger or hatred. If content on our devices makes us feel scared, or angry, or hateful, we need to think three times before sharing it. We know, from those who have been on the frontline in combating Covid-19, that aside from the right equipment and resources, the elements that count are kindness and compassion. Our suggestion, if you enjoy sharing stuff, but don’t want to verify everything? Find stuff that fills you with happiness, with joy, stories of kindness and compassion. Read this story, and be inspired: We decided that if we die we will die in the line of duty – PE hospital doctors keep maternity unit going against all odds. DM William Bird is director of Media Monitoring Africa. Thandi Smith is head of programmes at Media Monitoring Africa. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.