Cricket South Africa has postponed its AGM scheduled for 5 September 2020. (Photo: Adobestock) On Monday evening Cricket South Africa (CSA) delivered the message most stakeholders wanted to hear – the annual general meeting scheduled for 5 September could not go ahead while so many issues remain unresolved. The sport’s governing body needs to elect a new president and fill several key positions on its board. But none of that could happen in the current climate, where the publication of the findings of an independent forensic audit into the state of the game are essential to understanding the scope and scale of poor corporate governance that has plagued CSA for years. Various stakeholders, from Affiliated Unions such as the Central Gauteng Lions, to independent administrators, have called for the postponement until the forensic audit can be studied. It seems the pressure has paid off – for now. Moroe gone, but CSA is far from functional  It’s also a very clear indication that the details contained in the forensic audit implicate some individuals who were nominated for election at the coming AGM. The statement from CSA on Monday night also referenced that it was willing to look back at the recommendations of the 2012 Nicholson Commission of Inquiry into Cricket. That inquiry, which came in the wake of a scandal involving then-president Gerald Majola, recommended that CSA expand the appointment of independent directors. Ideally, it stated, the CSA board should be staffed by a majority of independents rather than stakeholders to avoid conflicts of interest. Unfortunately, Nicholson’s recommendations were never followed and within a few years the organisation was nearly crippled because of it. Cricket SA bosses: Nicholson who?  Recently sacked CEO Thabang Moroe ran the organisation like a personal fiefdom with little or no oversight from the board. Currently seven members of the board are also provincial union presidents. There is little to no impartiality, which is the major reason why the board failed in its fiduciary duties. It’s quite clear now that the forensic audit has unsurprisingly raised the issue of a compromised board and the need for an independent chairperson. “There are certain critical processes at CSA which are underway,” a statement from CSA read. “It relates to the following: “These strategic structural matters and remedial actions require various steps to be undertaken in the following: “In order to allow CSA and its stakeholders an opportunity to fully consider and participate in the finalisation of the matters referred to above, the Board of Directors of CSA and the Members Council have resolved to postpone the AGM. “Consequently the AGM will not be held on 5 September 2020. CSA will accordingly announce a new date for the AGM in due course. The notice related to the AGM will be circulated in due course.” In the past fortnight CSA president Chris Nenzani, acting CEO Jacques Faul and board member Steve Cornelius resigned. That came in the wake of the nine-month disciplinary saga involving Moroe. He was eventually sacked last Thursday based on findings contained in the forensic audit, although the exact details remain unclear. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.