Since the 2010/11 season, the 15-goal mark in the Absa Premiership has only been breached thrice. By Knowledge Musona in that season, Siyabonga Nomvethe in the following campaign and Mwape Musonda last season. The current season has as much as five games left for most of the teams that house the Lesley Manyathela Golden Boot contenders. There are as many as seven goal poachers with a realistic chance of not only finishing at the summit come end of the season, but breaching the 15-goal mark. Knox Mutizwa – Golden Arrows (11 goals) The Zimbabwean international has been a key figure for Steve Kompela’s team this season as they continue to push for a top eight finish. Mutizwa has contributed 11 goals to their cause thus far. He has five games to try to add to his tally. Kermit Erasmus – Cape Town City (11 goals) The former Orlando Pirates frontman has proved pivotal for City this season, despite injuries resulting in him missing a few games for the team. With his 11 goals thus far, Erasmus has already surpassed his best goals tally in an Absa Premiership season. His previous best was the 10 goals he netted for Pirates in the 2014/15 season. Bongi Ntuli – AmaZulu (12 goals) Relegation-threatened Usuthu have not had many reasons to celebrate this season. However, their powerful and pacey number nine has given them a glimmer of hope during the Covid-19-disrupted season. Out of the 14 goals scored by the team from KwaZulu-Natal to date, Ntuli has contributed 12. The striker hasn’t scored since resumption, but that is to be expected with his team having played only one game so far. Peter Shalulile – Highlands Park (13 goals) The Namibian international has been pivotal and decisive in the Lions of the North’s onslaught to secure a top eight finish and play in the MTN 8 next season. He raced to 12 goals prior to lockdown, and has already added to his tally after finding the net in spectacular fashion against Mamelodi Sundowns to earn his team a point in their first game post lockdown. Bradley Grobler – Supersport United (13 goals) Matsatsantsa are not short of talent within their ranks, boasting some of the Absa Premiership’s most exciting players such as Sipho Mbule and Teboho Mokoena. The duo’s creativity in the middle of the park has been complemented exceptionally by Bradley Grobler. The seasoned campaigner has been the team’s reference point for goals, which has seen him reap the rewards in his most successful season for the club to date. Samir Nurkovic – Kaizer Chiefs (13 goals) Samir Nurkovic is one of the key reasons that Kaizer Chiefs find themselves at the summit of the Absa Premiership log. He has been extremely reliable for Amakhosi, and has often inspired them to victory when it seemed their backs were against the wall. Case in point, when Chiefs came from behind to beat Polokwane City 3-2 recently. He laid on two assists and scored one. Gabadinho Mhango – Orlando Pirates (14 goals) The Malawian international leads the pack of predators, with three of his fellow marksmen breathing down his neck. He has scored 14 league goals so far, including a hat-trick versus Polokwane City. Having failed to score in the past six encounters, he will be looking over his shoulder and sweating. He has four games to attempt to fend off the competition and become the first Pirates player to clinch the golden boot since the late Lesley Manyathela in the 2002/03 season. Expert advice Collins Mbesuma holds the record for most league goals in a single season, having scored 25 back in 2004/05. The Zambian has also won the accolade twice, another local record. And he had some advice for the contenders recently. “Football is a team sport, you understand. You can’t think about yourself; you have to think about the team first. I think the strikers like Nurkovic, Mhango… you don’t have to put yourself under pressure,” Mbesuma told KickOff.com. “First you have to play a game, you can’t score without playing. You have to play a game first and goals will come. First you have to think for the team, then yourself. The time you start thinking about yourself, then you are killing yourself.” DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.