(Photo: Tony Jackman) Ingredients Basmati rice, cooked and drained (as much as you require depending on how many you are serving) Per 2 servings (adapt quantities as necessary): For the rice: 1 onion, chopped 1 Tbs cumin seeds 2 Tbs ghee or cooking oil Handful coriander leaves, finely chopped Salt and pepper to taste For the mince: 3 Tbs ghee or cooking oil 400 g lean beef mince 2 medium onions, chopped 3 garlic cloves, chopped 100 g Tomato paste 400 g chopped tomatoes 400 ml water 2 cm piece ginger, grated 1 tsp ground yellow mustard seeds 1 tsp turmeric powder 1 tsp ground fennel seeds 1 tsp ground coriander seeds 1 heaped Tbs extra hot Durban masala (or masala of your choice) Salt to taste Chopped coriander leaves for garnish Method For the mince, melt ghee or heat oil and sauté onions, garlic and grated ginger with all the ground spices. Add the tomato paste and braise, stirring, for two minutes. Add the chopped tomatoes and equivalent amount of water, and the masala, and stir to combine. Add the mince and work it with a wooden spoon so that it does not clump. Season well with salt. Bring to a simmer and put it on the lowest heat for 50 minutes, stirring occasionally. Serve with spiced basmati rice. For the rice, cook basmati rice according to packet instructions or your favoured method. Drain. Fry the chopped onions in ghee (clarified butter) or oil with cumin/jeera seeds until lightly golden. Season. Stir into cooked, drained rice. Finely chop coriander leaves and stir in immediately before serving. DM/TGIFood Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Send your Lockdown Recipes to tony@dailymaverick.co.za with a hi-resolution horizontal (landscape) photo. Thank God It’s Food is sponsored by Pick n Pay. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.