Our accompaniments were carrots roasted in foil with rosemary, and nutty mushrooms cooked in a pot on the coals. (Photo: Tony Jackman) The best way to find a new way of doing something is to think it through, then throw caution to the winds and just do it. My thinking was that I wanted to use a potjie as if it were an oven. No French-style mélange of chopped onions, celery and carrots at the bottom. No broth or liquid of any kind other than oil. Just the chicken, its seasoning, and the hot potjie. That, and time, and some attention. The key thing I learnt is that it will not roast in the same way as it will in an oven, with the exposed half of the chicken browning. To get it to brown and crisp all over, you have to turn it. So here’s how… Ingredients 1 large fresh whole chicken, giblets removed, cleaned and patted dry inside and out Zest of 1 lemon (and the lemon itself) 2 heaped Tbs rosemary needles, finely chopped Salt and ground black pepper to taste 4 Tbs butter 2 Tbs olive oil Method Have a fire going and coals ready to go under the potjie, which should not be too near the flame. Clean the bird, pat dry, and cut off the wing tips, which you can either discard or freeze to go into a future chicken stock. Salt and pepper inside the cavity and all over the skin. Shove a few rosemary sprigs inside the cavity. Cut the lemon you used for the zest into quarters and stuff inside the cavity. Just use as much as will fit. Mix together the chopped rosemary needles, butter, and lemon zest. Pack this all over the bird, especially on the breast side. Pour 2 Tbs olive oil into the potjie and put it over coals. Put the lid on and put coals on the lid. After about 10 minutes, put the chicken in, top side down. Give the pot a little shake. Put the lid on and put more coals on too. Let that side brown for about 10 minutes, then turn and brown the other side for 10 minutes. Repeat this process, another 10 minutes for the top side, and another 10 minutes for the other. Then leave the chicken breast side up to continue cooking for about two hours, with the lid on and coals on the lid. Try to avoid lifting the lid or the temperature will drop. If, when near done, the top side isn’t crisp enough for your liking, use two wooden spoons to carefully turn it over (but be careful it does not fall apart as it’s tender and by now) and crisp that side for 10 minutes more. TGIFood Tip: Lemon potato wedges would be a wonderful accompaniment to this dish. Douse wedges in olive oil and lemon juice, season with salt and pepper, and roast in a hot oven until golden and crispy. Shake the pan once in a while, and turn the wedges once carefully with a spatula. DM/TGIFood Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Send your Lockdown Recipes to tony@dailymaverick.co.za with a hi-resolution horizontal (landscape) photo. Thank God It’s Food is sponsored by Pick n Pay. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.