epa08587220 A handout photo made available by the Lebanese government official photographer Dalati and Nohra showing French President Emmanuel Macron (L) meeting with his Lebanese counterpart Michel Aoun (R), upon his arrival accompanying French aid to Lebanon following a massive explosion at port two days earlier, at Beirut Airport, Beirut, Lebanon, 06 August 2020. Macron arrived to Lebanon to show support after a massive explosion on 04 August in which at least 135 people were killed, and more than 5,000 injured in what believed to have been caused by an estimated 2,750 of ammonium nitrate stored in a warehouse. EPA-EFE/DALATI NOHRA HANDOUT HANDOUT EDITORIAL USE ONLY/NO SALES France has long sought to support its former colony and has sent emergency aid since the blast, but is worried about endemic corruption and has pressed for reforms as a financial crisis deepened in the Middle East country. After landing in Beirut, Macron said France’s solidarity with the Lebanese people was unconditional, but said he wanted to tell some “home truths” to political figures. “Beyond the blast, we know the crisis here is serious, it involves the historic responsibility of leaders in place,” Macron told reporters. “We can’t do without telling each other some home truths,” he added. “If reforms are not carried out, Lebanon will continue to sink.” He mentioned reforms of the energy sector, public tenders and the fight against corruption. Lebanese officials have blamed the disaster on a huge stockpile of a highly explosive material stored for years in unsafe conditions at Beirut port. But many Lebanese people who have lost jobs and watched savings evaporate in a financial meltdown have blamed it on politicians who have benefited from decades of state corruption and bad governance. French Foreign Minister Jean-Yves Le Drian called for “concrete action” during a visit to Beirut last month and said protesters’ calls for change and transparency had “unfortunately not been heard so far.” (Reporting by Michel Rose; additional reporting by Sudip Kar-Gupta, Editing by Timothy Heritage) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.