(Photo: Adobestock) No financial adviser will even give you financial advice without having access to your budgets as a significant part of what is called fact-finding about you. This is required in legislation. In times of an unrestrained virus, lockdowns and ongoing theft of taxpayers assets, budgeting becomes even more important. The short term and the longer term are both uncertain, particularly for people who have already lost their jobs, may still lose their jobs or have been retired early. Do two budgets (if you have not done one). One for the year ahead to see what you spend, and one into the future. This means both what you will receive and what you will pay out. Once you have the first year’s budget, then work out a longer-term budget, taking into account inflation rates, of the things you expect might go up (healthcare bills), or down (using a car). You must be cautious with a budget: Overestimate what you spend (particularly in the longer term), and underestimate what you will receive as income. This a fact sheet, not a wish list. You should keep your short-term budget every month. Budget in advance and then compare that with the money you actually spend. If you are overspending, you need to budget again, find new employment, create a new job for yourself or depend on relatives. The same applies to your longer-term budget which should be based on your monthly spend plus inflation, particularly medical inflation. The first three steps you should take are: Take great care in making a sound decision. Below are some of the issues you should consider: This is the last column in this series in helping new pensioners and existing pensioners to adjust to the changing face of the South Africa economy. These changes will continue for a long time – well after any vaccination is found for Covid-19. In South Africa, this has also been overshadowed by the past and current corruption. Finally, don’t wait. Take action now before it gets too late. My thanks to Business Maverick for publishing the columns for pensioners. It is very important that these columns are read by both pensioners and their dependents as there are many issues that affect both. These columns, with additional information, will be published as a book in early September 2020. The book is: Secure Your Retirement: How to Beat the Effects of Corruption, Ratings Downgrades and Economic Lockdowns. It is written by myself and top financial adviser, Wouter Fourie CFP and is published by Zebra (which is part of Penguin Random House South Africa). DM/BM Bruce Cameron is the semi-retired founding editor of Personal Finance of Independent Newspapers, and with co-author, Wouter Fourie CFP,  are the writers of the best-selling book, The Ultimate Guide to Retirement in South Africa. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.