(Photo: Unsplash/Mélissa Jeanty) The lockdown being entered into in South Africa does not yet fulfil the conditions recommended by the head of the WHO leading the global response, as well as other leading scientists including 2013 Nobel Prize winner for Chemistry winner Michael Levitt. In particular, it is important to know that the only countries where a lockdown has been successful in containing the epidemic is where it has been coupled with widespread community-based testing of symptomatic individuals throughout society, followed by their isolation in dedicated facilities if required (as is the case in SA), as well as the tracing of their contacts and the systematic follow-up. In the absence of this system being in place, modelling data in fact shows that a lockdown is unlikely to yield any inroads in interrupting the epidemic. Up to now, the Achilles’ heel in the response is the failure of the National Health Laboratory Services (NHLS) management to have ensured that it has adequate capacity to test samples at scale. This lack of planning is exacerbated by the shortage now being faced across South Africa in the availability of consumables necessary for the testing, let alone for the tests to be done. This requires intervention at the highest level and NHLS needs to partner with other capable groups, including laboratories in academia who are willing to help but are not yet being roped in, to enable an immediate scaling up of laboratory testing capacity within the next 72 hours. It is an open secret that for a long time the NHLS has been plagued by corruption and mismanagement which has at times threatened delivery of vital pathology services. Although, thankfully, the NHLS is being cleaned up, we are aware that tensions remain. It is to be hoped that the national interest is the only factor now influencing programme development. That is why it is crucial that oversight of scaled-up testing for Covid-19 should be directly managed, without any hindrance, by the National Priority Programme (NPP) at NHLS. In this programme we have world-class experts who have direct experience in being able to scale-up testing for HIV and Tuberculosis (TB) at a huge scale. However, the NPP must also ensure inclusion of other partners from the private sector and academia to maximise capacity. This should be planned at a provincial level for districts and localities that are identified as hotspots of Covid-19 transmission. Communicable disease experts agree that the key steps for a lockdown to work in stopping transmission and thereby “flattening the curve” is addressing the questions of who to test, when to test, why the testing is being done and how to respond to the test results. In this respect, at the minimum, the following needs to be implemented immediately: Unfortunately, many experts advise that if all of the above is not done then we may be entering into a cycle of successive lockdowns. They say modelling shows that the Covid-19 cases will start manifesting one to two weeks after the lockdown is lifted if all the steps above are not implemented simultaneously. That’s the challenge we have to meet. We cannot afford to fail. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.