epa08306693 Employees of the Srinagar Municipal Corporation (SMC) sit on a truck bed as they arrive to spray disinfectant in Srinagar, the summer capital of Indian Kashmir, 19 March 2020. Srinagar reported its first positive case of coronavirus on 18 March 2020 and as part of measures to prevent the spread of the pandemic COVID-19 disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus, authorities in Srinagar imposed restrictions in several areas and placed razor wires at some places to stop the movement of the people. The Jammu and Kashmir administration on 17 March banned foreign tourists from entering the Union Territory as a precautionary measure in view of the coronavirus outbreak, education institutions and public places have been also closed by government. There have been three confirmed Coronavirus cases in Jammu and Kashmir. EPA-EFE/FAROOQ KHAN Densely-populated South Asia has been slow to be hit by coronavirus compared to elsewhere in the world. But new cases in India, Pakistan, Afghanistan and Sri Lanka are all accelerating, with the total across the region topping 500. Five people have died of the disease in the region. Authorities worry that these countries could be especially at risk should the virus begin to spread locally, due to poor health facilites and infrastructure. In Kashmir, dozens of people told Reuters they had been prevented from leaving their neighbourhoods on Thursday because roads were blocked by police and paramilitary units. Srinagar’s senior superintendent of police Haseeb Mughal told Reuters that road blockades across the valley had been imposed to prevent the spread of the virus. “I had to go to take my mother to hospital in Srinagar but the police has closed the road,” said Mohammed Ayub, from the nearby town of Budgam. “I am waiting here for the last two hours. I can’t even go home now as the road is blocked due to a traffic jam.” Muslim-majority Kashmir, also claimed by India’s arch-rival Pakistan, has been relatively unaffected by the virus, reporting its first case on Wednesday evening. But the picturesque valley of seven million is one of most militarised places on earth due a decades-long insurgency against Indian rule, and its residents have been subject to prolonged curbs on freedom of movement. An internet shutdown that began in August following sweeping constitutional changes in Kashmir has only just been eased. Several other areas in India have introduced curbs on public assembly as coronavirus cases in the country rose to 166. Late on Wednesday, the desert state of Rajasthan invoked colonial-era laws that prevent the unlawful assembly of 4 or more people – powers more often used to quell riots. Similar restrictions were also introduced in Noida, a satellite city of New Delhi. India’s financial hub of Mumbai expanded its partial shutdown of offices to government buildings on Thursday, with at least half the staff ordered to work from home. The spread of the virus continued to hit markets across the region. The Indian rupee fell to a near-record low against the dollar, with Pakistan stocks hitting their lowest level in five years. Since emerging late last year in the Chinese city of Wuhan, the flu-like coronavirus has infected over 218,000 people and killed nearly 9,000. (Reporting by Fayaz Bukhari in Srinagar, Alasdair Pal in New Delhi and Rajendra Jadhav in Mumbai Writing by Alasdair Pal; Editing by Raju Gopalakrishnan) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.