(Photo: Daily Maverick) Government ministers may make oral statements to Parliament to address major incidents or highlight government policies and actions. Each political party is allowed an opportunity to respond to such a statement. On Tuesday, the Minister of Higher Education, Science and Technology will make a statement in the Nati0nal Assembly chamber on the state of readiness for the 2020 academic year. On the following day, select ministers in the Peace and Security Cluster will be probed on a variety of issues during their Question Time session. Members of the Cabinet are accountable collectively and individually to Parliament for the exercise of their powers and the performance of their functions. They must provide Parliament with full and regular reports concerning matters under their control. Everything from big-picture policy to specific scandals and non-performance will be on the radar. Just like the rest of the world, Parliament vibrates with concern about the coronavirus outbreak. As a result, the Speaker has scheduled an urgent debate on the coronavirus and the country’s readiness to deal with the pandemic. This follows last week’s briefing by the Chinese Consul-General to Parliament. According to the Minister of Health, 121 people have been tested for coronavirus (Covid-19) in South Africa and there is no confirmed case. Nevertheless, the screening of travellers at the ports of entry has intensified; the Department of Health has released a list of dedicated centres for isolation and treatment and the country remains on high alert. The debate will be led by the DA’s Shadow Minister for Health, Siviwe Gwarube, and is scheduled for Thursday. Beyond this, legislation, committee reports, a discussion on strengthening local government, Members’ statements, motions without notice and notices of motion are other agenda items. Elsewhere, the NCOP chamber will sit for two days this week. The highlight will be the appearance by the leader of government business to answer oral questions. These questions are restricted to matters of national and international importance, as assigned to the Deputy President by the President. Currently, the Deputy President is responsible for, among other things, social cohesion, the moral regeneration movement, manages the interaction between the Executive and Parliament, is special envoy to South Sudan and is chairperson of the South African Aids Council and Human Resource Development Council, so most of the questions touch on some of these themes. In addition, the NCOP has arranged a two-day Committees Strategic Planning Session. Away from Plein Street, public hearings on the Draft Constitution Eighteenth Amendment Bill – which seeks to amend section 25 of the Constitution – will take place in North West and KwaZulu-Natal from Thursday to Sunday. See the full plenary programme here. It’s a promising week in the committee corridor. Everything from detailed lawmaking, to Executive scrutiny, to important spending decisions and big-picture policy will be under the microscope. Here is a rundown of the highlights: See the full schedule here. The programme is subject to changes so the schedule needs to be checked daily for accuracy. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.