This is especially important as pressure mounts on NPOs to justify their budgets and spending by showing tangible impacts in their particular focus area. In being able to assess their performance in real-time, NPOs can make better decisions about where to focus their attention. In this article, you’ll learn: 1. Flexible working and better collaboration New technology brings huge benefits to charity organisations. Through increased efficiency and productivity, your people can work flexibly and remotely, something that’s required of all businesses in a post-pandemic world. Technology also helps teams to collaborate more effectively and to work smarter. 2. Stay compliant New technology makes it easier for NPOs to comply with data protection laws and regulations like the Protection of Personal Information Act (POPIA). With better business management information and insight, charities will have a better understanding of their fundraising efforts, expenditure, and donations. Millennials, who make up the fastest-growing potential donor base, want to understand the impact of their contributions, both at the time of investment and in the future. This means NPOs will need to increase transparency around what they do with donations, be it in time, money, or expert advice. With funding and compliance topping the list of charities’ concerns, new technology and digital transformation can help them to uncover new income streams, enhance the security and transparency of their communication, and help them to operate with agility and efficiency. 3. Make accurate, data-based predictions Technologies like artificial intelligence (AI) and big data give CFOs the ability to look forward and to make accurate predictions, which is more important than ever for NPOs. A recent report by Sage, CFO 3.0: Digital transformation beyond financial management, found that CFOs who used to look in their rear-view mirrors to provide business information while trying to steer in front, are transforming into real-time analysts and visionaries. The only difference between a for-profit organisation and an NPO, is that the latter’s focus is on helping others, rather than turning a profit for themselves. Technology can enable both. 4. Work more efficiently Many charities might find the idea of technological change daunting, and are concerned that it’s unaffordable. In fact, investing in the appropriate technology can save money in the long run due to higher productivity and more efficient ways of working. But it’s not only about investing money in technology; it’s also about investing time and resources, either in terms of project management or training your people how to use the new systems. Too often, technical implementations fail because the internal culture wasn’t considered. Investing time upfront to scope out the digital transformation project, and ensuring that leaders within the organisation advocate for the change, will reap long-term rewards. 5. Attract new talent NPOs are at an advantage in that they have access to highly skilled and experienced volunteers. Supporters with digital skill sets can help drive further technological benefits for your NPO. Some volunteers might be experienced in digital transformation and can help you to migrate your files, choose the best software for your needs, and train people within the organisation to think digitally when it comes to fundraising innovation. As the pace of change continues to increase, partnering with disruptive, socially conscious companies will become even more essential. Charities should be energised by these opportunities because, through them, they can have a greater impact for their supporters and beneficiaries. This might sound familiar: Your donor database sits in a CRM system, and email addresses have to be added manually via spreadsheets. Donations are processed separately, in a different system. This insufficient coordination and integration between systems wastes time and lets errors through. Here are some ways that modern financial management software can solve these challenges. Bottom line? Digital transformation frees up your staff to do the type of creative, strategic, and empathetic work that’s best left to humans. And that’s what charity is all about. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet