Charl Kinnear.
(Photo: Noor Slamdien) The suspect, the son of a former police colonel, was apprehended by the Hawks at 10pm at his home in Springs, east of Johannesburg. He was taken in for questioning and was expected to be charged within 24-hours. The man is expected to make an appearance in the Germiston Magistrate Court on Friday, 25 September 2020, before being transferred to Cape Town. Further investigation by Maverick Citizen revealed the suspect had allegedly tracked Kinnear’s cellphone for months. He was apparently asked by a person who identified himself as “Mohamad” to track the cellphone of his wife. The suspect claims he was not aware that he was in fact tracking Kinnear’s phone. This breakthrough will hopefully help investigators trace the phone of the person who requested the tracking of Kinnear’s phone. The arrest comes after investigators followed up all possible leads following the assassination of Kinnear around 3pm on Friday, 18 September in front of his house at 10 Gearing Road, Bishop Lavis. A week before his death, Kinnear was in Springs continuing his investigation into alleged underworld boss Nafiz Modack. Kinnear also investigated eight-high ranking police officers accused of colluding with fellow officers at the Central Firearms Registry (CFR). At the time of his death Kinnear was supposed to return to Gauteng and make further arrests of two high-ranking police officers. Hawks spokesperson Lieutenant-Colonel Philani Nkwalase has not yet responded to inquiries from Maverick Citizen. We will publish a response and confirmation from the DPCI when it is received This is a developing story. DM/MC Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet