Minister of Social Development Lindiwe Zulu, 12 December 2017. (Photo: Kopano Tlape GCIS) The ANC did not go to Zimbabwe for “a joyride”, Social Development Minister Lindiwe Zulu told an online seminar organised by the ANC’s OR Tambo School of Leadership on Wednesday night. “There was no other way that we could have gone there,” she said, seeming irritated by criticism from opposition parties that ANC members had abused state resources. The criticism of an ANC delegation hitching a ride on an Air Force jet earlier this month to meet their counterparts in Zanu-PF did not specifically arise during the seminar, which was addressed by party stalwart and academic Pallo Jordan and veteran Zimbabwe analyst Ibbo Mandaza, but Zulu commented during the question and answer session. Zulu said the ANC’s team had been “mandated by the National Executive Committee” to go, and hinted that, due to the Covid-19 lockdown, it had no other means to get to Harare. The officials met with Zanu-PF over challenges (most have called it a crisis) in Zimbabwe, but Zulu, with Defence Minister Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula, apparently went there primarily in their official capacity to meet their counterparts over government matters. President Cyril Ramaphosa has asked for a report on how it came to be that party officials benefited from a flight paid for by the taxpayer, while the ANC has vowed to pay back the money even as the party’s study group in Parliament found the trip was justified. “It’s very unfortunate that there is all this drama of the media and statements being made,” Zulu said. “I can tell you right now that we had one of the most open, honest, frank – both ways – meetings, to the point that the secretary-general of Zanu-PF himself [most likely a reference to Obert Mpofu] said this is almost the first meeting we have ever had of this nature where comrades said, ‘Yes we are liberation movements, yes we have been in the trenches, but how relevant are we today as liberation movements? Do we really see the opportunities for us to unite and respond to the needs of our people?’ ” Mandaza, however, didn’t think so. “Lindiwe is exaggerating the role of the former liberation movements,” he said, “unnecessarily so, especially with regards to Zimbabwe.” He speculated that it could be a “public relations stunt on her part to make peace with Zanu-PF”. Following the ANC’s meeting, Zulu has been backtracking from her much more critical stance the month before, when she said there was a “crisis” in Zimbabwe. Mandaza continued: “She must know, as we all know, Zanu-PF is heavily dented as a party, it is dependent on the military, but most important of all, it is completely naive and self-indulgent on the part of anybody, including herself, to think that Zanu-PF can turn around the fortunes of Zimbabwe.” Mandaza also commented on the fact that the ANC had failed to meet anybody outside Zanu-PF, as Ramaphosa, in an ANC briefing the week before, had promised the party would, and as his envoys tried to do during their visit the month before. “I think it is very important in the interests of the national dialogue that South Africa’s mediation must encourage whatever is left of Zanu-PF, whatever is left of the Zimbabwean state, which is in decline, to engage other political parties and civil society in national dialogue” towards resolving the crisis in Zimbabwe, he said. “Zanu-PF does not resemble in any way a liberation movement, notwithstanding its claims to the contrary. It has lost its soul long ago.” Mandaza also said that from South Africa’s side, “it is naive to expect that the ANC on its own can resolve the problems that are here and so real in our countries. As former liberation movements we should not indulge in the self-denialism of the kind that was seen in Harare. It is time for introspection like never before.” He said talks between South Africa and Zimbabwe should also touch on issues such as the trade imbalance, the illicit export of minerals to South Africa – some through elite collusion – and the exodus of skilled workers from Zimbabwe to South Africa. Jordan, who has kept a low profile after his resignation from leadership positions in 2014 after lying about having a doctorate, was also critical of the ANC’s softly-softly approach towards Zanu-PF, as well as remarks by Zanu-PF officials accusing the ANC of interference. “You don’t have to be asked to help where your neighbour’s house is on fire. Your neighbour might well say, ‘No, no, no, I can handle this, no need for you to come and help me’, but the neighbour should never interpret the offer to help as an attempt to interfere, and I think, unfortunately, that is the spirit in which the comrades in Zimbabwe have received interventions on the part of the ANC. “The ANC is not perfect and it doesn’t pretend to be perfect, and I’ll never suggest they are perfect. But I think the spirit in which the ANC delegation came to Zimbabwe was not to interfere in Zimbabwe’s affairs, but as a good neighbour that sees the house on fire and is coming to help. “And in any case, even when your neighbour says, ‘I can handle this’, it is in your self-interest to help your neighbour to put out the fire, because that fire might spread to your house,” he said. In the same vein, Jordan said, it was important that the region do something about the insurgency in Mozambique and treat it as an issue that affects the whole region, rather than a national issue. “In terms of the region, we need to start that framework in which countries act collectively,” he said. “The difficulties we face are far tougher than each country can handle on its own.” DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 9 As the song goes: Why the hell should we believe you? Clearly, there was a hidden agenda, and to orange head (as EFF Ndlozi calls her) this was indeed a joy ride There is both sexism racism in this response. Be careful, bhuti. Criticise the policies of the woman, not her appearance. And don’t justify your use of sexism and racism by saying that another black person “calls her that”. It’s stagerring how senior ANC leadership seem unable to understand that taxpayers money is not ANC money. The issue here is not whether the ANC is the right body to mediate in our neighbors challenges or not, but the fact they used State resources for non governmental business. Taxpayers are viewed as merely a means to an end it would seem. This trip was about as “justified” as Magashule’s other joyride, to Venezuela. He didn’t go there to find out any facts, merely to indulge in a bit of back slapping and mutual lionization. This little jaunt was just more of the same. The ANC has repeatedly interfered in Zimbabwe, every time on behalf of ZANU-PF. We should not forget that its foreign policies are implemented as a government, and “representative” of the taxpayer. When Mbeki’s regime turned a blind eye to the democratic right of Zimbabwe’s citizens to choose their own government, it was acting on our behalf. It ignored the vicious treatment by Mugabe’s police and army of people opposed to ZPF, and twice helped Mugabe steal the country, and it did it in our name. The result is a failed state, which is only sinking further and further. For the ANC to even think that any assistance it can offer will be of any use whatsoever, after the damage it has already done, is either merely putting on a show to indicate that it is at least doing something, or a mark of the most gobsmacking hubris in the history of this incompetent, undemocratic bunch of cockwombles. Birds of a feather… A “joy ride” it may not have been (no business or first class on military planes), but my guess is that the cadres wanted a close-up view of how to maintain power in an undeniably failed state… Among a lot of incompetent ministers, she is part of the “top performers”. Everybody knows the captain lied (Lyrics L.Cohen). It’s ironic that the minster of social development that has anything to say. There has been no social development in Zimbabwe at all…. and the ANC’s record on this is also dismal. It was the blind going to talk to the deaf about colour patterns for RDP houses that never got built because the money had long gone into their own accounts and using other peoples money to pay for the trip. Why didn’t the military tell them to get stuffed. It smells as bad as the garbage being unearthed at the Zondo Commission. There are two issues that I would have thought the ANC would have started to grasp after 26 years: 1. They are no longer a “Liberation movement.” That ceased when they were elected as the governing party. (But we may need a new liberation movement soon.) 2. The distinction between party and state. I believe most ANC cadres believe that the ANC is the government, and don’t understand that there is a difference. Winner takes all.