“There is a shortage of 140 billion rand in phase one, and a large part of that will come from green bonds,” said Patricia de Lille, the minister in charge of the public works department that’s overseeing the program. “We can’t just be a government of announcements and sod turnings.” South Africa faces backlogs in everything from power plants to broadband services and housing. While the government has traditionally funded most infrastructure, its coffers are empty, and it’s looking to tap the about 12 trillion rand that the country’s business organizations estimate is the total of savings and bank assets. For more on the launch of the program, click here “It’s not that the private sector doesn’t want to invest in infrastructure projects,” said Leon Campher, the chief executive officer of the Association for Savings and Investment South Africa, an industry body of fund managers and insurers that’s working with government. “The problem generally with infrastructure has been that it has been scattered all over the place. Local authorities want projects, provincial authorities want projects, government departments want projects and there’s no coordination.” Those departments don’t have the skills to properly assess projects and raise funding for them, he said, adding that the creation of a national infrastructure office may change that. The public works ministry and the infrastructure investment office in the presidency have started talks with investors and the JSE Ltd., which operates South Africa’s main stock and bond exchange, and plans to launch its green-bond program before the end of the year, De Lille, a former mayor of Cape Town, said. Appetite for so-called ESG bonds — notes that meet environmental, social and governance criteria– is rising worldwide. Mexico sold 750 million euros ($872 million) worth of sustainable bonds this month while Saudi Arabia’s power utility issued $1.3 billion of green bonds. Emerging-market governments and companies have sold a record $10 billion of green, social and sustainable bonds this year. While only 9.3 billion rand of green bonds have been listed on the JSE, the exchange could handle larger volumes, said Shameela Ebrahim, the bourse’s chief sustainability officer. The JSE has 1,800 bonds issued on its platform with a market capitalization of more than 3 trillion rand.Green Transport Eligible projects could range from renewable energy to green public transport and water management, De Lille said. Announcements on the time lines of some of the priority projects should begin in October, De Lille said. The process has been accelerated by bringing the project approvals under one roof, the central office of Infrastructure South Africa, and conducting license applications and environmental impacts assessments at the same time, she said. A 100 billion rand infrastructure fund, that will partner with private investors in so-called blended finance projects, has been set up. “We have a team at Infrastructure South Africa looking at the concept of listed project bonds and/or green bonds where you are funding renewables, so that you can crowd in more pots of capital,” Campher said. “That would be an attractive vehicle into a project for a provident fund that puts quite a premium on liquidity.” The government has also asked private companies to second professionals to the infrastructure department in a bid to get the projects up and running. “It’s the first time in the history of South Africa to have one department for infrastructure,” De Lille, the only member of Ramaphosa’s cabinet who is not from the ruling party. “We have created a single entry point for all infrastructure.” In addition to a lack of skills, the poor state of South Africa’s finances and those of its state companies such as power utility Eskom Holdings SOC Ltd. is an obstacle, according to Vuyo Ntoi, co-managing director of Old Mutual Plc’s African Infrastructure Investment Managers. “With technically bankrupt state-owned enterprises as the counter parties you need some sort of guarantee,” he said in an interview. “The challenge around government and the Eskom balance sheet needs to be resolved.” Dario Musso, co-head of infrastructure finance at FirstRand Ltd.’s Rand Merchant Bank, said plans put in place by the government are making good progress and that the state has showed a greater willingness to work with the private sector. “We are seeing great momentum, more than we have seen in the last decade,” he said. “But it’s not an overnight thing. It is a very long-term, staggered play to get these projects to market and get them delivered in a bankable way.” Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 1 We should not believe in magic wands. Green Bonds are not easy money – they simply restrict the lender to certain focus areas. For the borrower, the ‘benefit’ is that you have to go through the normal processes – show that you will be able to repay etc – and then incur the additional financial and administrative burden of demonstrating that you meet the green conditions. No extra money, just extra work!