Lovecraft Country In the 1950s, Atticus Black, a young African-American, sets out on a road trip to find his missing father. This catapults the three into a struggle for survival against the dual terrors of Jim Crow-era America and terrifying monsters that could be ripped from a paperback written by pulpy horror author HP Lovecraft. At the time of writing, Lovecraft Country has a 97% critics rating on Rotten Tomatoes and is #2 on IMDB’s Most Popular TV chart. Watch eps 1-4 on 8 September, eps 5-8 on 6 October, eps 9-10 on 20 October.  Ramy S2  Ramy stars 2020 Golden Globe winner and stand-up comedian Ramy Youssef as Ramy Hassan, a first-generation Egyptian-American millennial in suburban New Jersey grappling with how to be a good Muslim in the Tinder era. The show is up for three Emmys this month and was recently renewed for a third season. Watch now, only on Showmax »  Siren S3 

Siren takes us inside Bristol Cove, a coastal town that, according to legend, was once home to mermaids. When the arrival of a mysterious girl proves the folklore all too true, the battle between man and sea takes a vicious turn as these predatory beings return to reclaim their right to the ocean. A marine biologist finds himself drawn to Ryn. In the third and final season, Ryn’s baby is born against the backdrop of impending war. Siren has a score of 95% on Rotten Tomatoes. Watch now, only on Showmax »  Power S6 A New York City nightclub owner, James “Ghost” St. Patrick (Omari Hardwick), doubles as a drug kingpin to an elite clientele, which gets in the way of his attempts to turn his legitimate business into an empire. The sixth and final season sees Ghost seeking revenge for the ultimate betrayal. The spinoff, Power Book II: Ghost, starts on 1Magic on Tuesday, 15 September at 21:30, so it’s the perfect time to catch up. Binge Power S1-6 now »  World on Fire Set in 1939, on the eve of the German invasion of Poland, World on Fire follows the interwoven stories of ordinary people caught up in catastrophic global events beyond their control. The impressive cast includes Sean Bean and Oscar winner Helen Hunt, and the series scores 83% on Rotten Tomatoes. Watch from 24 September on the same day as M-Net.  Lazor Wulf He’s a wolf. With a laser on his back. And he’s the coolest thing in Strongburg. Lazor Wulf, Adult Swim’s latest series, is an acid vision of modern life and friendship, voiced by a predominantly black cast including rapper Vince Staples. The LA Times describes the show as “African American, retro, futuristic and strange.” Also look out for Mr Pickles spin-off Momma Named Me Sheriff  and the insane Ballmastrz: 9009 S1. Watch them all from 18 September, only on Showmax.  Big Brother Naija: Lockdown Finale

Big Brother Naija: Lockdown, launched on July 19, has shattered the records to become Showmax’s top live-streamed show. Fans follow the housemates’ every move on the 24/7 livestream on Showmax and DStv Channel 198 – especially the nail-biting evictions on Sundays at 19:00. Don’t miss the final on 27 September.  We’re Here This 2020 Emmy-nominated drag reality show from HBO has a 100% critics rating on Rotten Tomatoes. Renowned drag queens Bob the Drag Queen, Eureka O’Hara and Shangela Laquifa Wadley teach small-town residents from across America to step outside their comfort zones for a night of no-holds-barred, full-on drag – and a life-changing journey of self-discovery. Watch from 18 September.  Harriet Harriet tells the extraordinary tale of Harriet Tubman’s escape from slavery and transformation into one of America’s greatest heroes, whose courage, ingenuity, and tenacity freed hundreds of slaves. This powerful film is led by Cynthia Erivo (The Outsider) in the title role, for which she received a 2020 Oscar nomination as well as a Golden Globe nomination. Watch from 7 September.  After Based on the mega-bestselling novel by Anna Todd, After follows dedicated student Tessa as she falls for her first love, a brooding rebel. Josephine Langford and Hero Fiennes Tiffin star. Watch from 10 September.  Ben is Back Nineteen-year-old Ben Burns (Golden Globe nominee for Boy Erased) unexpectedly returns to his family’s suburban home on Christmas Eve. Ben’s mom, Holly (Oscar winner Julia Roberts), is relieved and welcoming but wary of her son’s drug addiction. Over a turbulent 24 hours, a mother’s undying love is put to the test as Holly does everything in her power to keep Ben clean. Watch from 14 September.  Rambo: Last Blood Winner of both the National Film and Television Award for Best Action Movie and a Razzie Award for Reckless Disregard for Human Life and Public Property, Rambo: The Last Blood sees movie legend Sylvester Stallone reprise one of his most iconic roles for one final mission – saving his adopted daughter, who was kidnapped by a cartel and forced into prostitution in Mexico. Watch from 17 September.  Mission: Impossible collection  Showmax has your throw-back action weekend sorted with all six Mission: Impossible movies. The franchise has grossed over $3.5 billion to date. Star, producer and head lunatic in the stunts department is three-time Oscar nominee Tom Cruise, who plays the indestructible Impossible Missions Force agent, Ethan Hunt. Ving Rhames and Simon Pegg recur as Luther and Benji, with stars like Jeremy Renner, Alec Baldwin, Henry Cavill, and Thandie Newton featuring across the series. Watch them all from 17 September.  Endlings S1  Set 20 years in the future, this heartwarming family sci-fi drama series follows a foster family on their missions to protect the extraterrestrial beings and endangered creatures the four teens discover. Recommended for 8+. Watch only on Showmax from 14 September.  Knuckle City In South Africa’s powerful 2020 Oscar entry, an aging, womanizing professional boxer and his career-criminal brother take one last shot at success and get more than they’ve bargained for. Directed by multiple SAFTA-winning rising auteur Jahmil X.T. Qubeka (Sew The Winter To My Skin), Knuckle City has a 100% critics rating on Rotten Tomatoes. “It is impossible not to be completely consumed by Knuckle City,” says The Globe and Mail, praising its navigation of “the painful issues of toxic masculinity, age and the impossible-seeming choices one can be forced to make to ensure the survival of themselves and the people they love.” Knuckle City was the most awarded film at this year’s SAFTAs, taking home six awards. Stream first on Showmax from 3 September.  Blessers Blessers stars SAFTA winner Kenneth Nkosi (District 9, Tsotsi) as a powerful CEO with a big house, a successful spouse, and expensive recreational habits. He feels like life will always be this easy but the women in his life have their own take on this not-so-shiny penny. Fun comedy from SAFTA winner Rea Rangaka (The Republic). Watch first on Showmax from 3 September.  I Am Not A Witch In Zambian director Rungano Nyoni’s debut film, an eight-year-old girl is denounced as a witch and sent to a witches’ camp. Like the other residents, she’s tied with a ribbon to a large truck and told that should she ever cut the ribbon, she’ll be cursed and transformed into a goat… Winner of 15 international awards, including the BAFTA for Best Debut, I Am Not A Witch has a 96% critics rating on Rotten Tomatoes. Watch first on Showmax from 7 September. DM/ML Subscribe to Showmax from R49 per month.