Volunteers pick up rubbish from the banks of the Kaalspruit River. (Photo: Shiraaz Mohamed) An astounding 1,000 bags of rubbish were removed from a section of the heavily polluted Kaalspruit River in Tembisa recently. A collaborative cleanup initiated by NGO Hennops Revival and supporters including 65 volunteers removed an estimated 25 tons of rubbish. Founder of Hennops Revival, Tarryn Johnston, and her team of volunteers removed nappies, tyres, bottles, shoes, clothing, food, furniture, toys, hair extensions, household waste and four dead dogs from the river. She said the river was full of sewage. A water sample had been sent for analysis. “It is a dumping ground. It is going to be a long process to change mindsets, but we are passionate about what we do and we know it will not be easy. It is so sad to see the river in such a condition, but it does bring some level of comfort knowing that none of this will be washed down the river when the rain comes and this rubbish will not enter the Hennops further downstream,” Johnston said. The Kaalspruit River runs from Kempton Park and winds between the City of and Joburg before it joins the Hennops River. Johnston began a cleanup campaign in November 2019 with the aim of reviving, restoring and healing the Hennops River, one of the larger watercourses in Gauteng and also among the most polluted. DA spokesperson for water, sanitation and energy in Ekurhuleni, Councillor Derek Thomson, who was part of the cleanup said: “I am passionate about the environment and what is happening to our river systems. With Tarryn and her team assisting us with her cleanup campaigns, not only are we able to remove the rubbish and waste, but we are also able to educate the people and get them to understand that they cannot just dump waste and throw things into the rivers.” Thomson said plans to repair and rehabilitate an old landfill site were a measure to prevent rubbish from being thrown into the river. Volunteers Lindy Anne Brown and her partner Ulrich Verburg said of their passion for contributing to the cleanup: “Water is life and if we don’t do it (the cleanup) no one else is going to. We have been volunteering since May. It is our duty and responsibility to take ownership even though it is not our rubbish. But we need to show the community that there are people who care. We find this very rewarding especially after taking before and after pics of the river.” DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 1 Hats off to the volunteers! Where’s the EFF, seeing that it Tembisa?