 This HBO film looks at the effects and real-life consequences of disinformation campaigns and conspiracy theories, from Obama Birther theories to fake news surrounding key political figures. Although fake news is nothing new, the latest technology and social media allow people and organisations to push their own agendas using increasingly sophisticated methods.   As the US gears up for the presidential election, this film takes a deep dive into the weaknesses of today’s election technology, an issue that is little understood by the public or even lawmakers. The doccie follows Finnish hacker and cyber security expert Harri Hursti as he travels around the US and the world showing how election systems remain largely unprotected and how easy it would be for individuals, foreign states or other organisation access them. Through this lens, some past security breaches can be seen as part of a “kill chain”, a long-game attack understanding that breaking down trust in election results is the surest way to undermine democracy.  These political shenanigans aren’t new – stream these biopics that honour some of the most influential figures in recent years, including the early life story of the Notorious RBG.   Felicity Jones plays the late, great Ruth Bader Ginsburg in this biopic that traces her struggles for equal rights, and the early cases of a historic career that led to her nomination and confirmation as an associate justice of the US Supreme Court.  Discover the true story of Mark Felt, who, using the pseudonym Deep Throat, fed information to journalists Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein. Their investigations uncovered the Watergate scandal in 1972 that led to the downfall of President Richard Nixon. Starring Liam Neeson and Diane Lane.  A group of journalists from the Knight Ridder group of newspapers covering former President George W. Bush’s planned invasion of Iraq in 2003 are sceptical of the President’s claim that Saddam Hussein has “weapons of mass destruction. The cast includes Woody Harrelson, Tommy Lee Jones, James Marsden, Milla Jovovich and Jessica Biel.  This documentary film tells the story of civil rights icon Martin Luther King Jr and the seminal events that defined the movement and an era in the US. It features interviews with civil rights-era activists such as Rev. Jesse Jackson, Ambassador Andrew Young, Congressman John Lewis and Rev. Al Sharpton  If you’re fascinated by politics, stream these doccies that take a deep dive into the recent upheavals in South Africa. Showmax has a great selection of local documentaries, covering topics from the Brett Kebble murder to the incredible story of The Boers at the End of the World.   A compelling look into how investigative journalists uncovered the corruption scandal surrounding Jacob Zuma and how his response was to brush the accusations off as fake news.  This thought-provoking documentary follows former Public Protector Thuli Madonsela during her final year in the role as she works to eliminate corruption from the Presidency in South Africa.  Subscribe to Showmax Pro from R225 per month and get access to live news, streaming 24/7. In South Africa, channels include SABC News, Africa News and Euronews. Plus, stream topflight live sport from SuperSport, including English Premier League, PSL and UEFA Nations League football. Find out more »  DM/ML Standard and mobile Showmax subscriptions start from R49 per month » Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet