“It’s a race against time,” Jean Castex said on France 2 television. “The public must be attentive and prudent. If we don’t act we could find ourselves in a situation similar to spring.” When asked whether France was heading towards a new confinement, Castex said the government did not want to, but left the door open if the situation worsened. “It could mean reconfinement,” he said. “The measures we have taken are to anticipate.” Health authorities reported 16,096 new confirmed coronavirus cases on Thursday, blowing away the previous record of 13,498 and setting a fourth all-time high of daily additional infections in eight days. The soaring infection rate and, with it, the renewed strain on the French hospital system have prompted the government to announce extra restrictive measures on Wednesday, mainly in big cities, to contain the disease. It ordered cafes and restaurants in Marseille to shut for two weeks and closed all gymnasiums from Saturday, after placing the city and surrounding region on the Mediterranean coast on the maximum alert level for the spread of the virus. Tougher measures were also announced in Paris and in 10 other cities, including closing cafes and restaurants at 10 p.m. (2100 GMT). The move has angered local politicians who fear the economic fallout and argue that the government has panicked in its decision making process. “The hour is serious and we must act. We have to hope that the virus won’t last 30 years and that we’ll find a vaccine,” Castex said. (Reporting by John Irish Editing by Chris Reese and Marguerita Choy) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet