epa08543995 A billboard campaigning for the prevention of the coronavirus is seen standing in a neigbourhood in Lagos, Nigeria, 13 July 2020. While governments at various levels and other institutional agencies have invested several billions of Nigeria's currency on advertorial campaigns on the prevention of the spread of the coronavirus, there are doubts among the general populace as to whether coronavirus is real, citing it as a politicized avenue through which politicians siphon money from the state coffers and, squandering donations from the international donors. EPA-EFE/AKINTUNDE AKINLEYE The strike began on Monday, and includes 16,000 resident doctors out of a total of 42,000 doctors in the country, Dr. Aliyu Sokomba, President of the National Association of Resident Doctors, told Reuters. “It is an indefinite strike until issues are resolved,” he said. “All resident doctors at the COVID-19 centres have joined the strike.” Nigeria, Africa’s most populous nation, has a total of 55,160 confirmed coronavirus infections and 1,061 deaths. Resident doctors are medical school graduates training as specialists. They are pivotal to frontline healthcare in Nigeria as they dominate the emergency wards in its hospitals. The group last went on strike in June, demanding better benefits and more protective equipment for battling the coronavirus. They are still demanding, among other things, life insurance and hazard allowance. In a statement, Minister of Labour Chris Ngige called on the doctors to suspend the strike. “All parties are enjoined not to employ arm-twisting methods to intimidate or foist a state of helplessness on the other party,” he said. The statement said the government had spent 20 billion naira ($52.56 million) on hazard allowances for healthcare workers in April, May and June, and had met the bulk of the doctors’ demands. Sokomba said the union planned to meet Ngige on Wednesday and hoped they could resolve issues and call off the strike. ($1 = 380.5000 naira) (Reporting By Camillus Eboh Writing by Libby George Editing by Peter Graff) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet