The EFF has instrumentalised violence as a key part of its political strategy and it’s working for the start-up party. Clicks, which published a racist campaign for a haircare brand, caved in to the EFF’s brinkmanship when it reached a rapprochement with the party on 10 September. It has done what the party told it to – disburse sanitary towels and bursaries as per EFF instruction – even though 37 stores were vandalised by EFF members, many in party regalia. The party has denied its members were the culprits, as it often does when things turn violent – as they frequently do. It has told Clicks it will help identify the “agents provocateurs” and see that justice is done. Don’t hold your breath. Violence is now a method with the EFF, as this graphic timeline shows.   In a Daily Maverick timeline tracker, the party and various of its members have been involved in various forms of serious violence at least 11 times since March 2018. While criminal and civil charges have been laid against them, most of these have not succeeded or the cases are still dragging their way through court, creating a playing field of impunity for the red berets. H&M and the hoodie from hell In January 2018, H&M, the Swedish retailer caused a storm when it advertised a hoodie showing a monkey on a young black boy. The young white model got a tiger hoodie. It caused a global crisis for H&M, which overhauled its global supply chain and its diversity and race policies. All good. But EFF members looted and vandalised stores and nothing happened. (It also didn’t stop the EFF leaders from shopping at H&M later.) In December 2018, EFF members looted and vandalised Vodacom outlets because they did not like a slide that ANC veteran Mavuso Msimang showed at a journalism award. The CEO Shameel Joosub and his executives met the EFF at its headquarters and no charges were pursued either by Vodacom or the franchisees who owned the trashed telco stores. Fast-forward to September 2020 and the EFF has repeated it in Act 3. This time its members trashed 37 stores and saw Clicks shut its entire fleet of more than 400 outlets for at least a day, some for more. Shoppers were harassed and social media was flooded with stories of people who could not get their chronic medication. Three CEOs have caved in to the EFF’s bully tactics. As a party represented in Parliament and with an outsize influence on South African politics, the EFF could easily use procedures at the legislature, through the Chapter Nine institutions and the courts to ensure that corporates who haven’t shrugged off the apartheid past are put through their paces.  But violence has come to serve the EFF well as a means of populism and of patronage. Part of the Clicks settlement allows the party to extend its patronage because it will decide where and to whom the sanitary towels and bursaries are distributed. Vodacom won’t say, but it’s likely the company was similarly shaken down.  This normalises violence and institutionalises hostage politics where corporations, eager to get out of the public eye and the headlines, will play nice with thuggery. It’s not unusual in gangster states – a lot of Latin America is run by political mafias. There’s more we don’t see On Radio 702 this week, Azania Mosaka, the afternoon host, spoke about how she knew of inter-family feuds where EFF T-shirts were worn to intimidate members and push through positions. Where it co-governs, the EFF is said to bully agencies to get its own people on to parastatal and state-owned entity boards. In light-manufacturing areas and on some mines, the EFF locals are like a cross between trade unions and militia, negotiating at workplaces without recognition agreements. These are parts of the country where there is no media glare and where the red T-shirt and red beret is often a symbol of a mayhem you’d rather pay to make go away. I’ve heard of business people, in turn, who will “hire” local EFF brigades to take care of problems, be it “troublesome” workers or debtors who won’t pay up. If you listen carefully at Parliament to the EFF positions on some matters, there is usually a lobby attached: its campaign to stop the curatorship of VBS Bank (before Pauli van Wyk exposed what was really happening) was an example of how the party can also become a pay-to-play machine. The party has franchised violence and when questioned, leaders will say that it has not patented the red overall and beret and that members engaging violence are not EFF. But, here’s where it gets important to watch the EFF Twitter timelines: the party leader Julius Malema has said that he needs Twitter because he and other leaders use their huge followings to direct action. The Clicks vandalisation was preceded by Malema calling his “ground forces” to “Attack” on Twitter as did his lieutenant EFF MP Mbuyiseni Ndlozi. While all the major political parties now organise on social media, the EFF’s viral footprint leaves the others panting in its wake. Who will bell the red cat? This tracker shows that almost nobody will and that the politics of violence is now part of the party’s DNA – an acceptable exhibitionism often laughed off “Argh, it’s just Juju”. Outgoing Wits vice-chancellor Adam Habib has shown the folly of such a position in this essay which likens the EFF’s tactics to early forms of fascism. We need to talk urgently about our new generation of activists – a small cohort romanticising war and violence  In the cases tracked by Daily Maverick, the two violence-related cases that have led to some accountability —  in the form of civil judgments against the EFF — were: Also in civil court in another defamation case, the EFF was ordered to cough up R500,000 and apologise to Trevor Manuel after labelling the process of selecting new SARS commissioner Edward Kieswetter as “patently nepotistic and corrupt”. Trevor Manuel 1, EFF 0 in defamation case  Various criminal charges against the party have dragged on, most for years. Violence can be like a bullet train – fast and unstoppable. Unless South Africans do something about it. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 11 The money trails have been well documented. What a pity we don’t have a functioning NPA – they should be all over them like a rash. Racketeering? Extortion? Incitement? Money laundering? Those who abuse social media should be removed. Very strange that Twitter and other social media platforms allow this type of incitement to violence on their platforms. Surely they should be banished from operating locally if they continue to do so? They don’t care what anyone posts, it all just about the ‘hits’ and the money they make. Sadly the bullet train is already unstoppable with the allied support of the appeaser “victims” and condoned by the passive bystanders – government agencies and so-called law enforcement.
Meanwhile the boys in blue are doing a sterling job. A rapid response team told me to put my dogs in a lead. Perhaps they mistook me for Juju? So not only does the EFF vandalise Clicks stores and find them guilty of a serious crime, it doles out a sentance which Clicks remorsfully accepts. “Thank you m’lord”.
We know what to expect from the EFF but Clicks are the main culprits here. Not for the ad but for enabling the EFF. Agreed … they (eff) are encouraged to continue their violence because they get away with it. Like paying a ransom to terrorists and then believing they won’t commit the same violent crime. The ANC is playing a game by allowing the EFF to carry on like this. A big question not addressed in Ferial Haffajee’s article is the degree of support within the ANC for this behaviour. Interesting times ahead. Webster’s definition of extortion – Extortion (also called shakedown) is obtaining benefit through coercion. Extortion is sometimes called the “protection racket” since the racketeers often phrase their demands as payment for “protection” from (real or hypothetical) threats from unspecified other parties; though often, and almost always, such “protection” is simply abstinence of harm from the same party, and such is implied in the “protection” offer. Extortion is commonly practiced by organized crime.
The question is – why have no criminal charges been laid? The Clicks advert was unbelievably short sighted and clumsy. To capitulate to the EFF and allow the EFF to control the distribution of the donated sanitary products and bursaries is as unbelievable. It will happen again and there will be more violence and vandalism to come when there is an EFF protest in the future because Clicks has demonstrated that it works. It is a great pity that corporate South Africa gives way to coercion like this. Thank you for list chronicling where the EFF is taking us. The wake-up call we need. Wake up South Africa!