A Bapedi traditional dancer leaps over a cowhide drum during a performance of the dinaka dance. (Photo: Lucas Ledwaba) Mifhululu is the magical call of Africa, a haunting melody that resonates in the great hills and gorges of the continent. The Sotho speaking people call it mokgolokwane. In the Nguni languages, they call it ukulilizela. In kiSwahili, it’s called vidonda. It’s a salute to the gods synonymous with the Bantu people, a trademark call to celebrate great milestones, births, weddings, ceremonies of thanksgiving for a good harvest, good rains… and to salute the gods for the gift of life itself. Mifhuluuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuulu! The significance of heritage is aptly captured in these quotes below by the Department of Arts and Culture and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO). “Living heritage is the foundation of all communities and an essential source of identity and continuity. Aspects of living heritage include: cultural tradition, oral history, performance, ritual, popular memory, skills and techniques, indigenous knowledge system and the holistic approach to nature, society and social relationships.” – Department of Arts and Culture. “Heritage constitutes a source of identity and cohesion for communities disrupted by bewildering change and economic instability. Creativity contributes to building open, inclusive and pluralistic societies. Both heritage and creativity lay the foundations for vibrant, innovative and prosperous knowledge societies.” – UNESCO. “Living heritage plays an important role in promoting cultural diversity, social cohesion, reconciliation, peace and economic development. In every community there are living human treasures who possess a high degree of knowledge, skills and history pertaining to different aspects of diverse living heritage. “It is therefore important for South Africans to reclaim, restore and preserve these various aspects of living heritage to accelerate the use of living heritage to address challenges communities are facing today.” – Department of Arts and Culture. DM/MC Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet