The Department of Public Enterprises, which is the sole shareholder of SAA, has missed the Thursday 17 September deadline to provide at least R10.4-billion for the airline to be restructured. (Photo by Gallo Images / Netwerk24 / Lulama Zenzile) SAA is again in danger of liquidation as urgent funding for the state-owned airline’s business rescue process has failed to materialise. The Department of Public Enterprises, which is the sole shareholder of SAA, has missed the Thursday 17 September deadline to provide at least R10.4-billion for the airline to be restructured. The deadline was set by the SAA business rescue practitioners, Siviwe Dongwana and Les Matuson, on 10 September, when they warned that the airline was facing a dire financial situation because funding from the government had been serially delayed. On Thursday 17 September, the rescue practitioners informed SAA creditors that they had again failed to secure funding from the government despite the approval of the airline’s business rescue plan two months ago. “The business rescue practitioners hereby advise affected persons that the anticipated funding has not been received by the company in accordance with the commitment from government to provide the funding for the restructuring of the company and the implementation of its business rescue plan,” Matuson and Dongwana said in a letter to SAA creditors and other affected parties. This means that the business rescue practitioners will be forced to schedule a meeting with creditors on Friday 18 September to review the business rescue plan and future of SAA. A meeting with creditors has been convened for 11am “to engage with affected persons on this issue and the proposed future of the company, taking into account all relevant factors”. “The business rescue practitioners will provide an update on the status of the financial position of SAA and the circumstances currently prevailing,” said Matuson and Dongwana. Without funding, the rescue practitioners would be required by the Companies Act to declare that SAA has no prospects of being rescued and place it under liquidation, which implies the death of the airline. The Companies Act governs business rescue proceedings in SA and sets out the role of rescue practitioners. The National Treasury and the Department of Public Enterprises joined forces in July to “mobilise funding” for the restructured SAA, but also said money for the airline could not come from the fiscus. The department said in a statement on Thursday that “efforts to locate funding sources” for SAA were continuing. It is also still working to attract equity partners that would inject capital into SAA in exchange for a shareholding in the airline, with the help of transaction adviser Rand Merchant Bank. “The Department of Public Enterprises believes the key to solving the difficulties facing SAA is the finalisation and implementation of the business rescue process; followed by the start of a restructured airline, appointment of a new board and executive team; and securing a credible strategic equity partner that can introduce the required technical, financial and operational expertise into the business,” the department said. In July, SAA creditors voted overwhelmingly in support of the business rescue plan, which requires at least R26.7-billion in short-, medium- and long-term funding from the government to restart the airline’s operations by January 2021. However, at least R10.4-billion of the required R26.7-billion is new money. Since the rescue plan was approved by creditors, the rescue practitioners said the government had only provided the airline with R9.3-billion in funding to pay its lenders. This is not new money because it is part of the R16.4-billion that was already allocated by Finance Minister Tito Mboweni in the February 2020 Budget for SAA to repay its historical debt to commercial banks, which are the airline’s biggest creditors and whose loans are guaranteed by the government. The rescue practitioners said the R10.4-billion in new funding that is immediately required from the government “has not yet been made available to the company”. This money is required to pay SAA creditors (whose debt is not guaranteed by the government), retrenchment packages to 2,600 affected workers and to fund the restart of the airline’s commercial flight operations in January 2021. DM/BM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 1 No surprise there , the cupboard more than bare it’s not even there anymore.