“With these undergraduate bursaries we want to address the funding gap in vital sectors of the South African economy. When we considered our bursary programme we asked ourselves how we could add to the country’s productive labour force in these critical sectors, and the simple answer was to expand the fields of study beyond financial services,” says Khadeeja Bassier, Head of Product & Strategic Change at Ninety One. The bursaries on offer therefore cover study options as wide ranging as financial services, IT, engineering select health sciences like nursing or physiotherapy, psychology and education (specifically encouraging maths and science teaching). “We’re looking for young and inspirational people who are going be the real Changeblazers of the future, as we’ve dubbed them, who will make a difference in our communities, be the leaders of tomorrow and really move the economy forward,” Bassier added. In addition to academic excellence, Ninety One would be looking for applicants who demonstrate leadership qualities too. The bursary applications are open to students who would like to start their first year of study next year. To meet the criteria, an applicant should intend on studying full time in one of the fields of study, at a South African university, should be a South African citizen under the age of 21 in 2021, and must demonstrate financial need. The candidate should meet the minimum entrance requirements for their chosen field of study, and demonstrate academic excellence, preferably having obtained a minimum of Level 6 (70%) in English and mathematics or sciences in Grade 11. The comprehensive bursary covers full tuition, accommodation, meals and learning material. More information is available online at http://ninetyone.com/changeblazers. The closing date for application is 30 September 2020. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet