epa08655016 A Malian woman holds a poster with the image of Colonel Assimi Goita the president of the National Committee for the Salvation of the People (CNSP) as she attends a mass gathering of supporters of the CNSP at Independence Square in Bamako, Mali, 08 September 2020. Mali President Ibrahim Boubakar Keita resigned 19 August 2020 after a coup by the military on 18 August 2020 with the National Committee for the Salvation of the People (CNSP) steering the process towards a transitional government. EPA-EFE/H.DIAKITE  The 15-member Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) imposed economic sanctions after the Aug. 18 overthrow of President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, and said a new president should be appointed by Tuesday. But the junta pushed through a charter on Saturday that says the interim president can be a soldier or a civilian and has not yet indicated when the new government would be named. Regional presidents met junta leaders on Tuesday in Ghana in an attempt to quicken the transition. “Today is supposed to be the day that the junta is to put in place a government, which should respond to the criteria we set out in August. That has not been met,” said Ghana President Nana Akufo-Addo, the acting ECOWAS chair, before the start of talks. Regional leaders fear the coup could set a dangerous precedent in West Africa and undermine a fight in Mali and neighbouring countries in the Sahel region against Islamist militants with links to al Qaeda and Islamic State. “That country can no longer afford any delay in putting a responsible government in place,” he said. West African leaders have not said what the consequences would be for failing to meet the deadline. The existing sanctions include border closures and the suspension of financial flows. The charter approved at multi-party talks in Mali also calls for an 18-month transition, while ECOWAS had said that fresh elections should be held within a year. (Reporting by Christian Akorlie; Writing by Aaron Ross; Editing by Edward McAllister, William Maclean) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet