Necsa's fired CEO Phumzile Tshelane (Photo: Flickr/SFEN/Andrew McLeish) Multiple sources, since confirmed by Nuclear Energy Corporation of South Africa (Necsa) chairman David Nicholls, indicate that the interview process for selection of a new CEO from a list of nine candidates, which includes the fired former Necsa CEO Phumzile Tshelane, starts tomorrow, Monday 7 September 2020. Other names on the list apparently include: Ayanda Myoli, the current acting CEO of Necsa; Ivan Radebe, MD of Pelchem and Ketlaphela Pharmaceuticals (both subsidiaries of Necsa); Thabo Tselane, chief technical officer of Necsa; and Loyiso Tyabashe, a senior manager: nuclear new-build, at Eskom. However, the Necsa chairman insists that there can be no “shortlist” until after the interviews. “As I understand the act on Necsa, the final approval/selection is by the minister, on the recommendation of the board. I presume that a ranked shortlist will be forwarded by the board to the minister in due course,” says Nicholls. Nicholls previously acknowledged that the Necsa board had considered offering its former CEO a substantial sum in settlement of all issues and litigation after his dismissal by the former Necsa board following a disciplinary hearing chaired by advocate Nazeer Cassim. It is understood that the board’s offer was rejected by Tshelane at the time. There were then proposals for Tshelane to be re-appointed as a consultant to Necsa, which the board authorised its chairman to present to Minister of Mineral Resources and Energy Gwede Mantashe for approval. At the time, it was suggested that this may be some kind of settlement in disguise, and possibly also a way back in for Tshelane as CEO. However, Nicholls confirmed that Necsa had since settled the issue of the claim Tshelane had in relation to the prior termination of his employment as CEO of Necsa, but has denied suggestions mentioning a monetary settlement of R4-million to R6-million. “I will not comment on the [settlement] amount, except to say it was nowhere near R6-million,” said Nicholls. Asked whether it may be considered irregular or contrary to good corporate governance for Tshelane to re-apply for the position of CEO after receiving a monetary settlement following his earlier dismissal after a disciplinary hearing, or whether the settlement precluded his return to Necsa as CEO again, Nicholls would not comment. However, the Necsa chairman did add that in terms of resolving the matter of Tshelane’s dismissal, it was seen as necessary to resolve this dispute before the process of appointing a new group CEO could be started. Tshelane referred all requests for comment to Necsa. Necsa is a state-owned enterprise undertaking R&D and commercial activities in the field of nuclear energy and radiation sciences, and the production of medical nuclear radioisotopes and associated services. Necsa is also responsible for processing source material, including uranium enrichment, and co-operating with other institutions, locally and abroad, on nuclear and related matters. DM Chris Yelland, managing director, EE Business Intelligence. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet