Image supplied - South African Book Fair The South African Book Fair takes place online from 11–13 September this year, covering topics from current affairs to food, economics, race and identity, and the art of fiction. Tickets are just R50 and give you access to the full three-day event. Click here to get yours. “Historic circumstances gave us an opportunity to reimagine this year’s SA Book Fair,” said Elitha van der Sandt, CEO of the South African Book Development Council (SABDC), which runs the fair. “We worked at curating an accessible and engaging programme that, even in these virtual times, continues to establish the unique role of books, authors and publishers in addressing the most relevant issues of the moment.” The fair kicks off on Friday afternoon at 18:00 with the Battle of the Book Clubs, and a performance poetry session. Events will then run from 10:00 to 21:00 on Saturday 12 September, and from 09:00 to 19:00 on Sunday 11 September, with between one and three options to choose from each hour. More than eighty writers and moderators are taking part: find them all here. At The Reading List, we’ve scanned the programme and found something for everyone, time slot by time slot. Here is our pick of the events – don’t miss out! *** For the kids The Magic Tent
11 Sep–13 Sep; All Day The Children’s Programme offers a range of activities for children and teens. From toddlers to grandparents, all are welcome to visit the Magic Tent and revel in the affirmative power of books and reading − for the first time or the thousandth time. For the budding gardener Down To Earth: From Garden to Table
12 Sep; 10:00 am–11:00 am Healthy living has many benefits. Add growing your own produce and the benefits are exponential! You’ll not want to miss Nicky Fitzgerald (Out Of An African Kitchen: Recipes And Stories From Angama Mara), Dudu Busani-Dube (Zandile The Resolute) and Jane Griffiths (How To Grow Organic Vegetables And Herbs In South Africa) sharing their secrets on how to grow your own food, in any sized space. Pippa Hudson navigates this journey. For fiction fans Time, Space and the Anthropocene: Fiction and the Fall of Man
12 Sep; 11:30 am–12:30 pm Lauren Beukes (Afterland), Siphiwe Gloria Ndlovu (Theory Of Flight) and Mohale Mashigo (The Intruders), explore the similarities between the fictional universes of their books, along with magic realism, our current reality and more. James Murua steers the conversation. For the amateur economist Is the Glass Half Empty? How to Create Economic Opportunities in South Africa
12 Sep; 11:30 am–12:30 pm Join Dr Jakkie Cilliers (Africa First! Igniting A Growth Revolution) and Tanya Cohen (contributor to Recession, Recovery & Reform: South Africa After Covid-19 edited by Raymond Parsons) for a deep dive into the lessons of the current historical moment and moving forward with positivity in times of economic uncertainty. Facilitated by Thuletho Zwane. For those who want a deeper understanding The World Looks Like This From Here: Masculinity, Misogyny and African Psychology
12 Sep; 11:30 am–12:30 pm The gendered journeys of “boys to men” and “girls to women” in contemporary SA townships is the subject of this fascinating discussion by Malose Langa (Becoming Men: Black Masculinities In A South African Township), Kopano Ratele (The World Looks Like This From Here: Thoughts On African Psychology) and Ayanda Borotho (Unbecoming To Become: My Journey Back To Self). Malebo Sephodi directs the conversation. For white people White Privilege
12 Sep; 13:00 pm–14:00 pm Melinda Ferguson (Smacked; Hooked), Fiona Snyckers (Lacuna) and Dr Sarah Godsell (Liquid Bones) speak frankly to Prof Christi van der Westhuizen about the meaning of white privilege – globally and in the context of South Africa. For the armchair investigative journalist Exposé! Stories that Gripped the Nation
12 Sep; 14:30 pm–15:30 pm What does it take to be an investigative journalist? Join Jacob Dlamini (The Terrorist Album), Rehana Rossouw (Predator Politics: DD, Fred And The Great Land Scam) and Qaanitah Hunter (The Balance Of Power) as they explore the perils and rewards of their important behind-the-scenes work with Iman Rappetti, author of Sermons of Soul. For the literary Giving Books A Place of Pride In Africa – The Role of Literary Journals on the Continent
12 Sep; 14:30 pm–15:30 pm Literary journals on the continent are creating awareness of great African writing. Rémy Ngamije (Doek!), James Murua, (James Murua’s African Literature Blog), Jennifer Malec (The Johannesburg Review Of Books), Troy Onyango (Lolwe) and Dr Ainehi Edoro-Glines (Brittle Paper) discuss the gaps that necessitated the creation of their diverse literary journals, as well as the challenges and opportunities available in the literary space. James Murua leads the conversation. For the legal eagles Law and Justice
12 Sep; 14:30 pm–15:30 pm Judge Dikgang Moseneke (All Rise: A Judicial Memoir), Andrew Harding (These Are Not Gentle People) and Advocate Tembeka Ngcukaitobi (The Land Is Ours: South Africa’s First Black Lawyers And The Birth Of Constitutionalism) discuss the successes and failures of the South African constitutional law in delivering justice. Prof Tshepo Madlingozi navigates this walk, and talk, through the law. For everyone Black Lives Matter
13 Sep; 14:00 pm–15:30 pm A trio of writer-activists – Zukiswa Wanner, (Hardly Working: A Travel Memoir Of Sorts), Sisonke Msimang (Always Another Country) and Munnira Katongole – interrogate the most important decentralised movement of our time, examining how marginalised segments of larger communities remain on the periphery. Moderated by Letlhogonolo Mokgoroane. For those tracing the arc of South Africa’s moral universe Hiding In Plain Sight: Exposing the Villains of Past and Present
13 Sep; 15:30 pm–16:30 pm South Africa remains ravaged by deceit. Is hiding the truth ever possible? Join Jacob Dlamini (The Terrorist Album), Imtiaz Ahmed Cajee (The Murder Of Ahmed Timol) and Rehana Rossouw, (Predator Politics: DD, Fred and the Great Land Scam) as they reflect on how the past finds its way into the present through the real-life stories captured in their books. Gaongalelwe Tiro, author of Parcel of Death: The Biography of Onkgopotse Abram Tiro, facilitates. For thrill-seekers Battle of the Book Clubs Finale
13 Sep; 18:00 pm–19:00 pm In the SABF’s closing event, the final two SA-based book clubs battle it out in a race to be crowned the “Lit-est book club in the land”. DM/ML Seeking more SABF goodness? Click here to view the 3-day programme in full. Visit The Reading List for South African book news – including litfest programmes! – daily. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet