CARLETONVILLE, SOUTH AFRICA - MAY 27: Premier David Makhura visit Sibanye Gold Mine where during the media briefing held at Sibanye Stillwater academy the premier declared the West Rand a Covid-19 hot spot following a new infections in the mines. Representatives of other mines were at the briefing too, which preceded the media briefing on May 27, 2020 in Carletonville, South Africa. According to a media release, the Gauteng Executive Council, led by Premier David Makhura assessed compliance with health and safety protocols at mining facilities and shopping centres across the province. (Photo by Gallo Images/Sydney Seshibedi) The rate of Covid-19 infections has continued to decline in Gauteng and the majority of beds allocated to coronavirus patients are currently unoccupied, but Premier David Makhura has warned residents to remain vigilant to avoid a second wave of infections. “Yes, we are moving to Level 1 but we want to continue to be vigilant. We don’t want the second wave. We don’t want to find ourselves in the peak we went through in July. “We can only do so by being vigilant, by working hard, by being on the ground,” Makhura said at the launch of the Lenasia South district hospital on Friday. At 33%, Gauteng has the country’s highest number of Covid-19 positive cases. Active cases stand at 37%, or 20,300 people. It has recorded 3,960 deaths, slightly behind the Western Cape’s 4,100 deaths. In the last seven days, the province recorded an average of 309 positive cases a day, down from a peak of 5,196 a day in July.  Gauteng has added 1,817 additional beds to cope with coronavirus patients, bringing the total available beds to 8,301, the bulk of them in the private sector. There are currently 2,138 coronavirus patients in hospital – 25.7% of the province’s current capacity. There are 648 patients in Gauteng currently in intensive care units or high care. When admissions peaked on 22 July, there were 7,193 patients in hospital, with 1,863 on oxygen. A total of 628 Covid-19 positive patients are now on oxygen in Gauteng, and 144 are on ventilators.   The province has almost 19 million items of PPE on hand, which it described as adequate, and over 118 million more have been ordered. “Covid-19 is not over. We are doing very well in reducing the numbers, in containing the spread. Johannesburg, you have done very well. There was a period when Covid-19 in Johannesburg was totally out of control,” said Makhura. “What am I worried about?” he asked. “The numbers in Tshwane are much higher than they have ever been on Covid-19, because there was a period where we were very worried about Johannesburg and then we got very worried about the west of Gauteng, the West Rand, what was happening in the mines. “We got worried about parts of Ekurhuleni… we deployed lots of resources working with the municipalities.”  The premier said the rate of infections in parts of Tshwane and Sebokeng, and Everton in Sedibeng, were worrying and state resources should be devoted to slowing the spread in those areas. The Lenasia hospital that was opened on Friday was upgraded from a community health centre and includes 103 beds, which were initially designed to treat coronavirus patients. “We are continuing to improve our capacity. Even if we were to have our second wave; even if the second wave does not come, we want better healthcare facilities,” said Makhura. “Let us continue… whether the peak comes or not, we still need good medical care.” Makhura condemned corruption in the province. The Gauteng ANC provincial executive committee is expected this weekend to discuss reports on allegations against Health MEC Bandile Masuku and presidential spokesperson Khusela Diko related to PPE procurement contracts. “As we deal with Covid-19 and with gender-based violence, we must deal with another pandemic – the pandemic of corruption,” said Makhura. “The Special Investigating Unit is hot on the heels of those who did wrong things, who got involved in corruption of PPE. They are not going to stop only with PPE.” “Corruption is everywhere in this process of fighting Covid-19… this time around people are going to go to jail, and this time around we want to see people going to jail.” DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet