Hasselback Potatoes, from Tony Jackman's foodSTUFF (Human & Rossouw). (Photograph by Myburgh du Plessis. Styled by Sarah Dahl.) Ingredients 6 to 8 medium potatoes, peeled Enough cooking oil to come two thirds of the way up of a large loaf tin 6 to 8 rosemary sprigs Water Salt to taste Method Peel the potatoes and put them in a pot of plenty of cold salted water. Bring to a boil and cook for no more than 10 minutes. Drain. When cool enough to handle, very carefully cut slices into them halfway through, in rows about 0.5 cm apart, being sure not to press so hard that you cut them all the way through. They will make ridges as you can see in the photograph. Pat the potatoes dry with kitchen paper before roasting them. Heat the oven to 200℃. Fill a large loaf tin with oil about two thirds of the way up, drop in the rosemary sprigs, and place in the hot oven. After about 20 minutes, remove from the oven, remove the rosemary sprigs, and use a slotted ladle to lower a potato into the oil. If it sizzles immediately, add all the potatoes (carefully so you don’t scald yourself) and return to the oven. If it does not yet sizzle, return the oil to the oven to bring to a higher temperature, and then place the potatoes in. Roast until beautifully golden and soft in the centre. Salt and serve. DM/TGIFood Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Send your Lockdown Recipes to tony@dailymaverick.co.za with a hi-resolution horizontal (landscape) photo. Thank God It’s Food is sponsored by Pick n Pay. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet