Artist Dimms adds final touches to his tribute to Eldorado Park teenager Nathaniel Julius. (Photo: Shiraaz Mohamed) Nathaniel Julies was allegedly gunned down by police officers from the Eldorado Park SAPS on 27 August 2020. His death led to unrest as the community demanded justice.  Said Dimms: “I feel so sorry for his mother and his family. God alone knows their suffering. As a parent, I would not want anything to happen to my kids. The reason why I did this is because I am still part of this community and it is the least I can do. It is a really sad thing, but maybe this death is not in vain — it will teach the community to stand united and to stand strong against any form of injustice.” Self-taught, Dimms developed a passion for art from the age of six and left his job to pursue his calling. When the news of Nathaniel’s death broke, he was devastated. As a father of three, his thoughts immediately went to Nathaniel’s mom. The mural stands on Kremetart Street in Eldorado Park Ext 3. Dimms, 38, began working on the mural on Monday 31 August. He did not know Nathaniel, but felt a great deal of pain on hearing of his death. Dimms, with a local car wash owner, decided to pay tribute and honour the slain teenager. They put together their resources and cleaned a wall and painted it with an undercoat. Dimms drew a stencil and filled in the colours before working on the finer details. The process took two days. Motorists passing by hooted and shouted encouragement at Dimms as he put the final touches to the work. People walking past stopped to admire the mural. Many signed messages of condolence on the wall and others took photographs. The two officers accused of murdering 16-year-old Nathaniel appeared briefly at the Protea Magistrate’s Court in Soweto on Monday 31 August and face charges of murder, discharging of a firearm in a public place, being in possession of prohibited ammunition and defeating the ends of justice. They have been remanded in custody until their bail application on September 10. The NPA said it would oppose bail. A third officer was arrested on 1 September. The detective from the Eldorado Park SAPS who has been charged with defeating the ends of justice and possession of prohibited ammunition, is set to appear in the Protea Magistrate’s Court on Thursday. Commented resident Faaiz Kaldine: “What this guy has done is a great thing. He has created an awareness and the more the people see it the more they will be reminded. It is also a great way of paying tribute to Nathaniel.” The face of Nathaniel’s mom Bridget Harris lit up when she spoke to Daily Maverick about the mural. “I want to say thank you. Thank you to the artist. I don’t know who he is, but it makes my heart feel so good. Nobody knew Nathaniel, nobody knew he had Down syndrome, but now everyone knows.” “God will bless the artist for doing this for my child.” DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.