epa07820536 President of Namibia Hage Geingob attends a plenary session of the World Economic Forum on Africa (WEF) titled Africa: Rising Continent in a Fractured World at the Cape Town International Convention Centre, in Cape Town, South Africa, 05 September 2019. The World Economic Forum on Africa runs from 04 to 06 September 2019. EPA-EFE/NIC BOTHMA  President Hage Geingob, during a media briefing, said the government had considered the economic implications of continuing the restrictions and the state of preparedness of its hospitals. The announcement comes a day after South African President Cyril Ramaphosa said the country would allow international travel from October and lifted almost all lockdown restrictions with effect from Sept. 21. Namibia’s economy which relies heavily on mining -particularly diamond exports – and wildlife tourism, is expected to contract by a record 7.8% in 2020 after being pounded by the emergency restrictions. “Yes, the virus is deadly, however, we are aware that poverty also kills,” Geingob said, adding that the state of emergency, which is due to lapse at midnight on Thursday, will not be extended. Travelling in and out of restricted areas including the capital Windhoek and the surrounding towns of Okahandja and Rehoboth will be permitted as a countrywide curfew is lifted, the President said. Contact sports will be allowed to resume, gambling houses and casinos can reopen and gatherings will be allowed up to either 50% of a venue’s capacity or a maximum of 50 people, according to attorney general Festus Mbandeka during the media briefing. New positive cases have dropped from a peak of 317 at the end of August to a low of 63 cases on Wednesday, according to a Reuters tally. (Reporting by Nyasha Nyaungwa in Windhoek Editing by Promit Mukherjee, Kirsten Donovan) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet