By Jarrett Renshaw and Trevor Hunnicutt The 90-minute debate on Tuesday night was chaotic, marred by the Republican president’s constant interjections and interruptions of both his Democratic rival and the host, as well as Biden’s angry rejoinders. The Commission on Presidential Debates, a nonpartisan group that has organized the events since 1988, said it would make unspecified changes to the format to prevent chaos. “Last night’s debate made clear that additional structure should be added to the format of the remaining debates to ensure a more orderly discussion of the issues,” the group said in a statement, adding that it is “carefully considering the changes that it will adopt and will announce those measures shortly.” Biden said in a campaign stop on Wednesday that he hoped organizers of future debates would be able to turn off the microphone of the candidate who is not speaking. “It was a national embarrassment,” Biden said of the debate and Trump’s performance. “I am not going to speculate what happens at the second or third debate.” Trump, meanwhile, was critical of the debate’s moderator, Fox News anchor Chris Wallace. “Chris had a tough night,” Trump posted Wednesday morning on Twitter, calling the debate a “two on one” fight. The debate commission defended Wallace, thanking him “for the professionalism and skill he brought to last night’s debate” and promising “additional tools to maintain order.” The candidates for vice president will debate next Wednesday, followed by two more presidential debates between Trump and Biden later in October. (Reporting by Trevor Hunnicutt in New York and Jarrett Renshaw in Alliance, Ohio; editing by Scott Malone, Diane Craft and Cynthia Osterman) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet