epa08688061 Britain's Prime Minister Boris Johnson departs Downing Street to make a statement in the House of Commons in London, Britain, 22 September 2020. Due to rising cases of coronavirus all pubs, bars, restaurants and other hospitality venues in England must have a 22:00 closing time from 24 September 2020. Further coronavirus restrictions and measures will be set out by the prime minister in the House of Commons on 22 September 2020. EPA-EFE/NEIL HALL After government scientists warned that the death rate would soar without urgent action, Johnson said the new restrictions in England could last for six months although he stopped short of imposing another full lockdown. “I’m sorry to say that as in Spain and France and many other countries, we have reached a perilous turning point,” Johnson told parliament following emergency meetings with ministers and leaders of the United Kingdom’s devolved governments. Just weeks after urging people to start returning to workplaces, Johnson advised office workers to stay at home if they could. He ordered all pubs, bars, restaurants and other hospitality sites to close at 10 p.m. from Thursday with only table service allowed. Face-masks will be required in more settings, businesses who break rules will be fined and there will be tougher enforcement against people who do not comply, he said. However, schools and universities will stay open. He will give a televised address to the nation at 1900 GMT. Government advisers have said the number of new cases could reach 50,000 per day by mid-October. Johnson warned further restrictions could be brought in should the new measures not work. “We will not listen to those who say let the virus rip, nor to those who urge a permanent lockdown,” he said. “We are taking decisive and appropriate steps to balance saving lives and protecting jobs and livelihoods.” (Reporting by Guy Faulconbridge, Kate Holton, Elizabeth Piper, David Milliken, Andy Bruce, Estelle Shirbon, Sarah Young and Michael Holden; Editing by Clarence Fernandez, Andrew Cawthorne and Stephen Addison) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet