Gosiame carries newborn brother Umpile while standing outside their family house in Johannesburg after President Cyril Ramaphosa declared a National State of Disaster as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic. (Photo: EPA-EFE / Kim Ludbrook) The two poems that follow are different in style and context, but both speak to the potential of language and gesture to reach “through the bars.” Gabeba Baderoon’s poem laments a heedless betrayal of the human need “not to be alone.” Jeremy Cronin’s dramatic poem, written during his imprisonment under the Terrorism Act, re-enacts the gestural inventiveness and solidarity between isolated political prisoners. *** Poetry for Beginners By Gabeba Baderoon  In the evening poetry class for beginners a girl in a thick brown coat she doesn’t take off  breathes in deep and risking something says fast  My boyfriend’s in prison  I’m here to find out how to write to him through the bars  and someone laughs  and she pulls herself back into her coat and from inside looks past us  and the next week doesn’t come back  and I think of her for years and what poetry is  I think this is my origin where poetry is risk, is betrayal  And the memory of the first question how not to be alone From The History of Intimacy, Kwela Books, 2018 *** MOTHO KE MOTHO KA BATHO BABANG (A PERSON IS A PERSON BECAUSE OF OTHER PEOPLE) By Jeremy Cronin  By holding my mirror out of the window I see Clear to the end of the passage There’s a person down there. A prisoner polishing a door handle. In the mirror I see him see My face in the mirror, I see the fingertips of his free hand Bunch together, as if to make An object the size of a badge Which travels up to his forehead The place of an imaginary cap. (This means: A warder.) Two fingers are extended in a vee And wiggle like two antennae. (He’s being watched.) A finger of his free hand makes a watch-hand’s arc On the wrist of his polishing arm without Disrupting the slow-slow rhythm of his work. (Later. Maybe, later we can speak.) Hey! Wat maak jy daar? – a voice from around the corner. No. Just polishing baas. He turns his back to me, now watch His free hand, the talkative one, Slips quietly behind -Strength brother, it says, In my mirror, A black fist. From Inside and Out, David Philip Publishers, Cape Town, 1999. DM/MC/ ML    Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.