(Photo: NeedPix) Even before Covid-19, South Africa was under severe fiscal pressure. It is now accepted that the economic fallout resulting from the outbreak will inflict long-lasting damage to the local economy. Small businesses, in particular, are vulnerable and many will struggle to survive without support. Given the urgency of the situation and the sheer scale and magnitude of the crisis, aggressive, decisive and immediate action through temporary and targeted measures is imperative to prevent (as far as possible), long-term damage to the South African economy. In the medium term, more comprehensive policy-based interventions could be considered to boost economic growth (such as, for example, tax incentives and reduced tax rates). The following are the measures that South Africa should adopt urgently: Tax administration Corporate tax Indirect tax This will also potentially be more beneficial to many small businesses than a deferral of the payment of provisional tax and employees’ tax as many small businesses may not be in a taxable income position or may not have significant employees’ tax liabilities as a result of most employees falling below the tax threshold. Based on the Tax Statistics 2019, a deferral of the payment of 100% of the VAT liability by businesses with a turnover of less than R50-million for four months paid over the following six months would result in approximately R21-billion in VAT payments being deferred (before considering the impact of the lockdown and closure of businesses on VAT liabilities). The cost of this from a time value of money perspective would amount to no more than R775-million at an interest rate of 8.75%, according to our estimates, but would give small businesses vital breathing space. Personal income tax Payroll tax Implementing these measures would have an immediate impact on mitigating the economic effects of the Covid-19 pandemic. A combination of some or all of these measures, appropriately targeted at SME businesses where appropriate, would be the most effective in keeping SMEs alive and in mitigating against job losses. Temporarily adopting significant fiscal measures to support small businesses, in particular, and to protect the tax base in the medium term is vital. Not doing so may result in a long-term reduction in the tax base and tax revenues through the closure of businesses and loss of employment, and a far deeper fiscal crisis. DM/BM Kyle Mandy is an adviser to Business for South Africa Covid-19 Response initiative. The article is a summary of the detailed proposal submitted to National Treasury.  Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.