Abraham Oliphant, 32, waits for breakfast to be served at a homeless shelter in the municipal hall in Lyttelton on 3 April 2020. (Photo: EPA-EFE / Kim Ludbrook) In response to the coronavirus crisis, we have seen communities in Cape Town mobilising to provide relief and support to the most vulnerable on a scale that hasn’t been witnessed since the dark days of apartheid. Over the past two weeks, there has been an amazing movement to organise within, and between, communities through the Cape Town Together Facebook group and the respective Community Action Groups (CANs) set up and paired through this group. There is, however, an uncomfortable discussion that we need to have – one that is absolutely necessary for building and maintaining social cohesion in our difficult context: What does responsible community engagement look like and how do we put this at the centre of what we do? We need to acknowledge that our country’s past has led to citizens experiencing the present in vastly different ways – Cape Town is, in fact, a tale of three cities, at least. This means that, as we tread through each other’s spaces, we must be mindful of how, and why, other people’s experiences may be different from ours. In an effort to start this conversation, we have put together a list of ten things that we feel are important to consider when building relationships with people and communities you might lack knowledge of. We are sure that there are many other things to consider but this is a start – a beginner’s guide to respectful relationship building. Covid-19 has shown us that we need to work together and support each other if we are to survive this crisis and, in the process, work to build a new society that nurtures all of us instead of only a few. As South Africans, the legacy of apartheid means that we have a lot to learn about how to engage with respect and in a spirit of learning and generosity. The response to the crisis shows that we all want to, and indeed can, help to create the kind of society we need. Our willingness to engage can only have greater impact if we are deeply conscious of the legacy of our past and our responsibility related to our privilege, while retaining a spirit of learning and adaptation. DM Rushka Ely and Gill Cullinan work for the Western Cape Economic Development Partnership (EDP), an NPC that works to foster collaboration around complex issues. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.