Normally bustling, Long Street in Cape Town is devoid of traffic as a result of the Covid-19 lockdown (7:30am, 21 April 2020). Photo: Gavin Silber First published by GroundUp The physical distancing measures announced by President Cyril Ramaphosa on 15 March followed by an extended lockdown may have bought us time to prepare for Covid-19. Good leadership has helped the response, but the current lockdown is not sustainable. In city centres and middle-class suburbs there is largely adherence, but in many marginalised areas the lockdown is fraying or not being followed. Income has been abruptly stopped, making paying rent or buying food difficult. Job losses and the prohibition of informal trade are causing increased hardship, making life unbearable. If there is a further lockdown extension, physical distancing measures will lose legitimacy, allowing the virus to run free, with catastrophic consequences for life and the economy. So, what should we do? The truth is that no one knows the answer with certainty. But we should all debate this. Our suggestions attempt to balance slowing the spread of the virus with opening the economy and making life more bearable: No doubt the above is controversial in parts, but these are not decisions only for political leaders and health experts to make without consultation. A public debate is vital. DM Venter has been involved in HIV and broader public health and clinical programme design and implementation. Mngadi works in HIV Vaccine Research in Tembisa. Mashabane has been involved in HIV clinical trials implementation, aiding transformation through the inclusion of unemployed graduates and digital innovations. Lalla-Edward is a public health monitoring and evaluation specialist focussed on research capacity strengthening in HIV, non-communicable diseases and digital health. Geffen is GroundUp editor. Cooper works in Public Health at the University of the Western Cape, and is involved in the socio-economic determinants of health and community health outreach.  Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.