Limpopo MEC for Health Dr Phophi Ramathuba. (Photo: Gallo Images / Sowetan / Sandile Ndlovu) The Limpopo Department of Health has noted the malicious and personal attack on Dr Phophi Ramathuba, the MEC of Health in the province. The personal attacks are disguised as Corona Virus/ Lockdown analysis headlined “PHOPHI RAMATHUBA, A HEALTH MEC OUT OF TOUCH AND OUT OF PLACE” published on the 15th of April 2020. Nowhere in the article does the journalist attempts to give a picture or the status of the pandemic in the province. We are not informed of the excellent work done by the health care professionals in the province under the political leadership of the MEC to curb the spread of the virus. The MEC was on the forefront as part of the leadership of this province calling for the lockdown in the country. We have noted a disturbing trend in Daily Maverick’s reporting when it comes to the department of Health and the MEC. It always appears that Daily Maverick (DM) isn’t objective nor does it report on the department of health fairly. This fact is proven by this recent cobbling together of various issues that we have previously dealt with under the guise of a feature article. The intentions are very clear, Daily Maverick is used by business interest groups and some opposition parties to run sensationalist stories without due regards of facts or the truth. The question we ask ourselves is, has Daily Maverick adopted a political posture or is itself a political mouthpiece? Below we deal with specific issues that the article raises and hope that they will be published unaltered: Daily Maverick would have understood that the MEC’s pushback approach in the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic is not only to protect the few rich and privileged individuals whom you write on behalf of but to also protect the majority of these poor and vulnerable people in our rural areas. Daily Maverick would have noticed that all the decisions which the MEC and the department took are based on the material conditions on the ground such as the capacity of the public health care system to accommodate a widespread pandemic.  The MEC is on record, firmly indicating that considering the rurality of Limpopo Province and the limited resources, the only way as a department we can win the battle against COVID-19 is on the street not in our hospital wards and ICU because even first world countries with advanced health systems are struggling. We can only win by focusing on screening, testing, tracing, quarantining and isolation.  This is the pushback strategy which the MEC and the department have been emphasising in order to ensure that the virus is dealt with before there could be a need for admissions. She knows her limitations in terms of specialized Physicians and ICU nurses to deal with this pandemic in case it spread. The Provincial Treasury has through the request by the same MEC investigated the entire process and couldn’t find any wrongdoing by any official. If Daily Maverick has facts that can prove that the MEC or the department had erred in judgement, we challenge them to approach the court with such evidence and we will follow the ruling on the court on the matter. The MEC has respect for the Daily Maverick and good work it has done in the past, but on account of its recent reporting, it is difficult not to buy into widely held view that it is starting to behave like a proxy of some business interests which are viewed as anti-black. We would like to hope that this view is incorrect and invite Daily Maverick to report fairly and objectively. These are the same Community Health Care Workers whom today as a department we can proudly deploy to all our villages to do the massive screening of COVID 19 without incurring any extra costs – which we do not have. Of course the Daily Maverick will not publish these kind of gains because the beneficiaries are poor and down-trodden and not elites whom the publication has been apparently established to act as a proxy for. It was not only Ndlovu care group that was affected, so many NGOs were affected but Daily Maverick will never write about the other NGO’s probably because they are owned and run by black people. It appears to us that the Daily Maverick had a pre-determined objective and date on which to execute such agenda in this request for an interview to project the MEC in the negative light. The MEC accepts that she is a politician and a public figure, therefore is open to criticism but the facts of the matters on which she is criticised must be reflected fairly. IN SUMMARY THIS HAS BEEN OUR APPROACH TOWARDS FIGHTING COVID 19 IN THE PROVINCE AND THE MEC HAS BEEN THE CENTER OF THIS BATTLE BEING IN TOUCH WITH REALITY ON THE GROUND: That will give us a clear indication of the burden of disease in the province.  Those who after screening will require testing will be tested on site by a tracer team comprising of 589 Professional Nurses and 5 mobile NHLS testing units. We know the disaster ahead of us is inevitable, but our MEC is clear that history will judge her as one of those leaders who was decisive in a quest to protect majority of her own people who are poor and vulnerable, who would not survive if the virus was to attack them. Those are in the villages and in our informal settlement. Those are her constituency. It will be good if the author can also mention that the MEC is a leader of the South African Communist party where she has been serving as the provincial treasury long before elected as ANC PEC. It will also assist to trace her activism back to her student life where she served in number of student representative councils. In simple language she was not parachuted as your article seeks to suggest. We look forward to a collaborative effort with Daily Maverick in pursuit of informing the people of Limpopo and the country about the efforts of the department and the government at large.  Daily Maverick and all other media outlets are important in the dissemination of the true state of affairs and not to tailor negative narratives to fit a particular narrow agenda to the detriment of the broader majority. We remain open to constructive criticism based on the true tenants of journalism which are truthfulness, accuracy, objectivity, impartiality, fairness, and public accountability, as these are pillars of newsworthy information which is fit for dissemination to the public. Regards, Neil Shikwambana Departmental Spokesperson Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.