epa05913087 (FILE) - University of Cape Town (UCT) scientists work in the Drug Discovery and Development Centre (H3-D) laboratory in Cape Town, South Africa, 30 August 2012. South African Science and Technology Minister Naledi Pandor announced 28 August 2012 the discovery of a compound that has the potential to become a single-dose cure for all strains of Malaria. The synthetic molecule from the aminopyridine class was discovered by the H3-D scientists in collaboration with the Medicines for Malaria Venture (MMV) from Switzerland. Professor Kelly Chibale from UCT, leading researcher of the collaborative research project is quoted as saying the molecule had not been tested on humans yet but animal studies had shown 'potent activity against multiple points in the malaria parasite's lifecycle' This is the first compound researched in Africa to enter pre-clinical development that may lead to the single dose cure for Malaria as well as be able to block transmission of the parasite from person to person. World Malaria Day is on 25 April 2017 and will be marked with the theme 'End Malaria for Good' for the second time running. EPA/NIC BOTHMA PLEASE REFER TO ADVISORY NOTICE (epa05913068) FOR FULL PHOTO SET TEXT The region has more than 25,000 confirmed cases of COVID-19, with more than 1,200 deaths, and governments working with partners such as the WHO are focusing on tackling the pandemic. WHO Regional Director for Africa Dr Matshidiso Moeti called on all countries to ensure that essential malaria prevention work continues. “A recent analysis has found that if insecticide-treated bed net distribution stops, and case management reduces, malaria deaths in sub-Saharan Africa could double in comparison to 2018,” Moeti said at a briefing. “This would be the highest number of deaths seen in the region since the year 2000.” She pointed to statistics from Africa’s ebola outbreak showing that more people died of other diseases, including malaria, than from ebola itself, due to lack of access to treatment. “Let us not repeat that again with COVID-19,” she said. In 2018, there were 213 million malaria cases and 360,000 related deaths in the African region, accounting for over 90% of global cases. The WHO said that if the focus on slowing the spread of the new coronavirus leads to a reduction by three quarters of access to anti-malaria medicines, deaths could double to 769,000. “Countries across the region have a critical window of opportunity to minimize disruptions in malaria prevention and treatment and save lives at this stage of the COVID-19 outbreak,” the WHO said in a statement. The doubling of the number of deaths represents the worst case scenario, which also assumes the suspension of all distribution of treated mosquito nets due to the pandemic, the WHO said. Benin, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sierra Leone and Chad have all initiated anti-malaria programmes during the pandemic, the WHO said, adding that should serve as a model for other nations on the continent. (Reporting by Duncan Miriri in Nairobi and Libby George in Lagos; Editing by Giles Elgood) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.