epa08212361 Food rations provided by the World Food Programme (WFP) sit at an aid distribution center in Sana'a, Yemen, 11 February 2020 (Issued 12 February 2020). According to reports, international donors have warned that humanitarian assistance could be scaled-down to the Houthi-held northern areas of Yemen, accusing the Houthis of diverting food assistance from the hungriest people of war-ridden Yemen. Over 24 million people are in desperate need of humanitarian aid due to a five-year armed conflict between the Saudi-backed Yemeni government and the Houthis. EPA-EFE/YAHYA ARHAB The World Food Programme (WFP) said 7.7 million Zimbabweans, half the population, need food aid after a devastating drought and cyclone last year. A lack of predictable rains this year has affected crops, compounding the situation. The coronavirus pandemic has added to the pressure. Zimbabwe has recorded only three deaths and 11 cases, but economists predict it could face a second successive recession this year as the pandemic shuts down large parts of the global economy. Zimbabwe’s mining industry, the largest single earner of foreign exchange, has already signalled that exports could fall by a quarter due to the effects of the new coronavirus. “With most Zimbabweans already struggling to put food on the table, the COVID-19 pandemic risks even wider and deeper desperation,” Eddie Rowe, WFP director for Zimbabwe, said in a statement. “We must all do our utmost to prevent this tragedy turning into a catastrophe.” The WFP said inflation, at 540% in February, was pushing prices of staples beyond the means of most Zimbabweans, forcing families to eat less and sell off belongings or go into debt. Zimbabwe is under a 21-day lockdown but some residents have complained this risks exacerbating the situation. More than 80% of the working population ekes out a living in the informal sector, leaving them with few protections. The government says the lockdown is necessary to contain the spread of the virus, which has killed more than 81,000 people globally. (Reporting by MacDonald Dzirutwe; Editing by Nick Tattersall, William Maclean) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.