It is now perfectly clear Donald Trump has gotten a whole raft of results in the Middle East, in this, the latest episode of the long-running show, “The Middle East Follies”. By ordering the killing of Iranian Quds Force and Revolutionary Guard big guy, General Qasem Soleimani, through a lethal drone strike while the general had been consulting in Iraq with his “business partners” about their revolutionary militia endeavours and terror activities, Donald Trump has achieved a nearly impossible litany of feats. The drone strike killed Soleimani, yes, but in so doing, he also achieved the following: Totally unsurprisingly, given that warfare in this manner is an express violation of the norms of “civilized warfare” and international treaties signed by the US, there has been a growing tide of horror and indignation by scholars, international law specialists, cultural figures and the leaders of other countries normally supportive of the US over such a threat. Oh, then there was the shock and horror expressed by Iranian leaders. They had benefited from this own goal by Trump, but they managed simultaneously to say that such acts would be repaid sixfold upon America — and that Donald Trump was an uncivilised barbarian — in contrast to Iranians and Iran, a centre of civilisation for millennia. On Tuesday night, Iran fired a dozen or so missiles at military bases housing American forces, claiming that this strike represented a fair and appropriate response to the earlier drone strike. Not surprisingly, the Americans claimed there were no casualties, while the Iranians said there were — perhaps to give its citizens the sense of adequate retribution for the drone strike. <span data-mce-type="bookmark" style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span> If one looks closely, and squints one’s eyes, it is just possible to see this crisis easing a bit. Just perhaps there will be no open, overt hostilities, no sunken ships across the Strait of Hormuz blocking the shipment of up to a third of the globe’s total oil shipments, no trading of barrages of long-range missiles and drones, and no fast convoys of armoured troops moving swiftly across the desert. Perhaps, instead, the two nations will return to their previous state of glowering, snarling hostility, without much real bloodshed. But one thing has truly changed. That overwhelming American presence in the Middle East is now flowing out, ebbing away; and the responsibility for guaranteeing this outcome now lies squarely at the feet of Donald Trump. He has nearly achieved his campaign promise to bring back the troops from that foreign war in Iraq, but in a way that virtually guarantees outcomes antithetical to the ones he had hoped for. The middle stanzas of Rudyard Kipling’s poem, Recessional, composed in 1897 for the Diamond jubilee of Queen Victoria’s reign, would seem to be the sobering words for today: The tumult and the shouting dies;
The Captains and the Kings depart:
Still stands Thine ancient sacrifice,
An humble and a contrite heart.
Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
Lest we forget ― lest we forget! Far-called, our navies melt away;
On dune and headland sinks the fire:
Lo, all our pomp of yesterday
Is one with Nineveh and Tyre!
Judge of the Nations, spare us yet,
Lest we forget―lest we forget! As a footnote, late on Wednesday, Donald Trump spoke to the nation — and the world — about his strategy towards Iran. He spoke from the strong side, justifying the drone strike on General Soleimani by virtue of that general’s evilness; blamed the current mess on former President Obama because of the six-nation nuclear accord; talked about the weaponry available that could be used if needed; called on Nato to step up; noted America’s petroleum independence; and added that there was the possibility of a “better” deal with Iran in the future. If you had to score this one, consider that it was a tiny ratchet back from confrontation, although he announced an intention of imposing more economic sanctions on Iran as well. What was remarkable, however, was the absence of any effort to set out or explain the “imminent threat” that had been the initial impetus for this crisis. Similarly, there was no setting out of a larger vision — or a reconciliation between his political instincts to draw down on American forces in the region on the one hand, and his emotional DNA that demands he always sounds strong, resolute, determined, and never, ever, weak. As veteran New York Times reporter David Sanger called the remarks, they were “a muddle”. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.