Breaking barriers, bridging the gulf between people in a year of social distance and isolation, technology proved to be one of humanity’s most powerful enablers in 2020. And now, as the year draws to a close, that promise shines brighter than ever in a line-up of devices that reviewers are calling “beautiful”, “breathtaking”, “incredibly capable”, and “ahead of their time”. Now you can get your hands on your own personal iPhone 12, the fastest, most powerful, best-looking iPhone ever,  by upgrading your cellular contract at iStore, South Africa’s Apple Premium Reseller. The iPhone 12, iPhone 12 mini, iPhone 12 Pro, and iPhone 12 Pro Max have landed on our shores just in time for the festive season, and there’s no need to go anywhere else but iStore to upgrade your life. Here’s what you need to know to get a great deal on iPhone 12, online or in-store. Get your iPhone 12 on a new contract or upgrade on Vodacom, MTN, or Telkom More than a one-stop destination for the latest in Apple devices and accessories, iStore is your port of call to upgrade your contract or to take out a new one on the three major cellular networks. Regardless of when or where your original contract was initiated, you can upgrade your contract at iStore. Check out the table below for some of the best contract deals at iStore. Upgrade online and get your iPhone 12 delivered straight to your door If you prefer to keep your social distance, it’s easier than ever to order your iPhone 12 online. You can simply upgrade your Vodacom, MTN or Telkom contract through iStore online – regardless of where you initially signed up for it – and iStore will send a courier to your doorstep with your new iPhone 12. For online contract upgrades, visit: https://www.istore.co.za/cellular-online-upgrade. Save money by trading in your current iPhone when you upgrade to iPhone 12 If you have an iPhone in great condition, from iPhone 7 through to iPhone XS, you can save up to R480 a month on your iPhone 12 cellular contract, when you trade-in at iStore. All you have to do is take your current iPhone to iStore for evaluation, and you’ll be in line to enjoy reduced monthly payments on your Vodacom, MTN or Telkom iPhone 12 contract. Get some great added benefits valued at over R2000 for free ReactPlus is an exclusive emergency-response app, developed in conjunction with iStore. You can get a free six-month subscription to ReactPlus when you purchase your iPhone 12 from iStore. After that, you can continue subscribing to ReactPlus for only R39 a month. You’ll also get free iCare Plus, offering Extended Warranty on your iPhone 12 with a screen replacement, valued at R1999. iStore offers a one-stop-shop when it comes to contract upgrades. So why would you go anywhere else?   *Reduction value calculated when trading in an iPhone Xs T’s & C’s apply  For more information about iPhone 12 mini and iPhone 12 at iStore, please visit: http://istore.co.za/discover-iphone/iphone-12 For more information about iPhone 12 Pro and iPhone 12 Pro Max at iStore, please visit: http://istore.co.za/discover-iphone/iphone-12-pro For more information on iStore, please visit: www.istore.co.za. Visit us on Instagram, Facebook and Twitter.  Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet