Reuters reported earlier that Microsoft was hacked and that its systems were used to attack other entities, citing people familiar with the matter. Any successful cyber-attack on Microsoft, the world’s largest software maker and the second-biggest cloud-infrastructure provider, could damage its standing as a trusted provider of cloud software and security services. The software giant’s involvement emerged as the wider repercussions of the far-reaching hack became more clear. SolarWinds’ customers include government agencies and Fortune 500 companies, according to the company and cybersecurity experts. The departments of Homeland Security, Treasury, Commerce and State were breached, according to a person familiar with the matter. The U.S. nuclear weapons agency and at least three states were also hacked. Separately, Microsoft said in a blog post about the broader cyber-attack that it identified and has been working this week to notify more than 40 customers that the hackers targeted more precisely and compromised through additional and sophisticated measures. Amid its investigation of its own networks, Microsoft has also been helping customers monitor and cope with the attack. Redmond, Washington-based Microsoft has become a significant vendor of cloud and security software and services, including to large government agencies, making its reputation for network protection critical to sales. The U.S. Defense Department has awarded Microsoft a $10 billion cloud-computing contract, which is currently being contested in court by rival bidder Amazon.com Inc. In an advisory Thursday that signaled the widening alarm over the the recent breach, the U.S. Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency said the hackers posed a “grave risk” to federal, state and local governments, as well as critical infrastructure and the private sector. The agency said the attackers demonstrated “sophistication and complex tradecraft.” In a filing with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission on Monday, SolarWinds said it believed its monitoring products could have been used to compromise the servers of as many as 18,000 of its customers. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet