South Africa's captain Siya Kolisi celebrates after winning the Rugby World Cup 2019 semi final match between South Africa and Wales at the International Stadium Yokohama in Yokohama City, Japan, 27 October 2019. EPA-EFE/MARK R. CRISTINO EDITORIAL USE ONLY/ NO COMMERCIAL SALES / NOT USED IN ASSOCIATION WITH ANY COMMERCIAL ENTITY Defending world champions South Africa will face Ireland and Scotland in Pool B of Rugby World Cup (RWC) 2023, as well as qualifiers from Asia Pacific and Europe. In what will be the 10th staging of rugby’s showpiece event, the Boks will face Ireland for the first time at the World Cup. Ireland have never progressed past the quarterfinals. As the defending champions and number one-ranked team in the world, South Africa are one of five teams in Pool B, along with two qualifying teams. The pool draw was completed in Paris on Monday with all teams taking part virtually. The Springboks will be defending a proud history as they have only lost three pool matches in seven tournaments – against England (2003), Japan (2015) and New Zealand (2019). The Boks have twice been in the same pool as Scotland, in 1999 and 2015. Since their first RWC participation in 1995, the Springboks have played 43 RWC games, winning 36 and losing seven. That winning tally, including three final triumphs, give the Boks an impressive win percentage of 83.72%. “We are obviously excited about the draw today, and although the Rugby World Cup in France is still almost three years away, it’s good to have an end-goal to work towards,” said head coach Jacques Nienaber. “To be in the same pool as Ireland and Scotland will be a massive challenge, but to win the tournament you have to be able to beat all the teams and we will be properly tested in the pool phases. “We saw [in 2019] the margin for error – even during the pool stages – at any Rugby World Cup is very small. “Take, for instance, our situation where we simply had to win every single pool game after our loss to the All Blacks in Japan, to ensure we qualify for the knockout stages. “If you look at the countries in the top three bands, I would say each one of those teams is capable of beating another on any given day, proven by a team such as Japan, who have made huge strides in recent years.” Bok captain Siya Kolisi was happy with the outcome. He also said the draw heralds a significant marker for them to aim at. “It’s exciting, really, to know who your RWC pool opponents will be for the 2023 tournament in France,” he said. However, Kolisi said that for the immediate future the Springboks’ attention will be on another huge and looming challenge. “For now we have to turn our attention to the massive challenge the British and Irish Lions will bring [in 2021]. There is huge anticipation, both at home and in the UK, for what promises to be another memorable Lions series in South Africa.” Former Ireland and British and Irish Lions captain Brian O’Driscoll was happy to see a new fixture at RWC, with the looming clash between the Boks and Ireland. “South Africa will be delighted with Ireland and Scotland… it’s another RWC quarterfinal for them,” O’Driscoll said with tongue in cheek on SuperSport. “You look at how Scotland are progressing and if they can keep their key players fit they’ll be dangerous. Ireland have dominated the head-to-head in recent times but Ireland has not delivered at RWC yet. “It’s nice to freshen things up against South Africa in the pool stage. Things might be different in a few years. It will be tough for Ireland to top the pool but it’s a challenge the Irish will relish.” Other pools New Zealand were drawn in Pool A with hosts France as well as Italy. In Pool C Wales, Australia and Fiji are drawn together. Pool D appears tricky with England, Japan and Argentina. “It’s a great pool to be part of,” England captain Owen Farrell said. “They are all tough pools, but the way Japan and Argentina are going at the moment and the type of rugby they have played over the past few years, it will be tough. “Argentina are passionate and the way they performed in the Tri-Nations showed their class. But there is a long time to go to the tournament and lots of time for everyone to improve and prepare.” Only the teams who finished in the top three at RWC 2019 in Japan qualified for the 2023 tournament. Eight teams still need to qualify over the next two years. The winner of Pool A will play the runner-up in Pool B, meaning the Boks could face the All Blacks, or hosts France in the quarterfinals. DM Pool A: New Zealand, France, Italy, Americas 1, Africa 1 Pool B: South Africa, Ireland, Scotland, Asia / Pacific 1, Europe 2 Pool C: Wales, Australia, Fiji, Europe 1, Final Qualifier Winner Pool D: England, Japan, Argentina, Oceania 1, Americas 2. DM  Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet