“Rushing to get money out of the door after the fact didn’t allow for analysis of how many businesses needed this help, could benefit from it, or could repay it,” Meg Hillier, who chairs the cross-party panel, said in a statement. “Dropping the most basic checks was a huge issue that puts the taxpayer at risk to the tune of billions.” The report marks the latest criticism of Chancellor of the Exchequer Rishi Sunak’s response to the resurgent pandemic. Opposition parties have already slammed him for being behind the curve after being forced into announcing major changes to Covid job support programs five times in six weeks. Sunak himself has acknowledged “deadweight costs” in some of his initiatives. Even so, the U.K.’s economic measures have been held up by the International Monetary Fund as “one of the best examples of coordinated action we have seen globally.” The bounce back loans program was deployed in May in response to criticism that normally profitable small firms were struggling to access an existing 80% state-backed program because of caution by lenders. U.K. Banks Near Agreement on Plan to Recover Soured Covid Loans The Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy estimated in September that losses in the program through fraud and inability to repay would total between 35% and 60% of the amount lent. The most recent Treasury statistics show a total of 42.2 billion pounds has been lent under the program, suggesting losses would amount to at least 14.8 billion pounds and could stretch above 25 billion pounds. The PAC attacked as “woefully under-developed” government plans for managing the risk to the taxpayer of non-repayment. It also said ministers lacked the data to be able to know how much of the losses would come through fraud, and how much through businesses that simply couldn’t repay the debt. The government said in a statement that it “won’t apologize” for targeting support at those who needed it “as quickly as possible,” and insisted steps are being taken to crack down on fraud. The panel also: Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet