Ginger biscuit frikkadels, from Share by Errieda du Toit (Struik Lifestyle). (Photo: Ian du Toit) This recipe is an adaptation of frikkadels in a sweet-and-sour ginger sauce that was originally made with brown breadcrumbs, ground ginger, golden syrup, plums, apple, dried apricots, prunes, sultanas and tomato. This recipe, from an old church cookbook owned by Hannerie Visser’s mother, takes an inventive shortcut: the ginger biscuits are a substitute for everything from the breadcrumbs to the spices and golden syrup.  (Makes 8 large or 12 medium frikkadels)  Frikkadels 500 g beef mince 125 ml sour cream or Bulgarian yoghurt 1 packet (50 g) brown onion soup powder 60 ml fresh breadcrumbs 2 eggs, beaten 3 ml salt Method Preheat the oven to 180 °C. Mix all the ingredients together well. Form the frikkadels and place in a greased oven dish.  Sauce 50 g ginger biscuits (about 6 biscuits), broken into pieces 50 ml tomato sauce 30 ml vinegar 30 ml soft brown sugar 50 g sultanas or currants (optional) 15 ml oil 250 ml meat stock Method Mix all the ingredients together and spoon over the frikkadels. Cover with a lid or aluminium foil and bake for 25 minutes, then bake uncovered for a further 5 minutes. DM168/TGIFood From Share, by Errieda du Toit, published by Struik Lifestyle. Photography by Ian du Toit. Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Send your Lockdown Recipes to tony@dailymaverick.co.za with a hi-resolution horizontal (landscape) photo. Thank God It’s Food is sponsored by Pick n Pay. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet