A man receives his meal from Ladles of Love in Roeland Street. Ladles of Love handed out a total of 9 274 221 meals since the start of lockdown till 21 November.
Photo / Shiraaz Mohamed Lameez (last name unknown) lives under a bridge at the Cape Town International Convention Centre. For her, there has been no difference between the hard lockdown and level 1. Lameez was moved to a shelter during the lockdown but ran away in order to find ways to support her heroin addiction. “I was there for a week before running away. We were promised methadone (to help with the withdrawals) but they did not give it to us. A few of us ran away … There is no difference between lockdown and no lockdown. In lockdown, people were too scared to roll down their windows to give me money and now it is still the same.” Desperation led Lameez to prostitution and petty crime to support her addiction. “This is my worst enemy and the biggest mistake I have ever made. It costs me R25 to R30 each time I want to use it. I can’t use it once a day, I need it three or four times a day. Sometimes when I have extra money I use tik as well.” She is not proud of her actions and would like to turn over a new leaf. She has tried to earn an honest living by selling stickers at a robot on Buitenkant Street, but says it has been difficult as the stickers that are sponsored by a good samaritan are only handed out to herself and other homeless people once a week. Qudra Thindwa lives on Roeland Street in a tent in an open field. He feels the same way as Lameez about the lockdown and level 1. He says he also left a shelter to move back to his small tent, which he shares with his girlfriend. “There were groups of gangsters, and drug addicts. All of them were put into one shelter. I could not live like that. Seven women were raped in shelters. They were not raped when they slept on the streets. They were raped while they were under the protection of the law. I asked the officials to put us into different groups but they said they could not. They said it was lockdown.” Another homeless resident, Magda Klaaste, lives alone outside the city with her dog. “They wanted to move me in lockdown but I did not want to go. Where will I go? Do you know what happened? During the lockdown they took people to a shelter. Someone was killed there and another lady was raped. I am safer here than in a shelter.” There has been an increase in the number of homeless people living on the streets and Covid-19 is being blamed for playing a part. According to social worker Charity Pote from the Hope Exchange, economic hardships brought about by the lockdown have seen an influx of people living on the streets. “What we are noticing in level 1 is that there are new clients living on the streets. The numbers are just increasing. Most of them lost their jobs. Economic hardships forced them onto the streets. Their families could not support them and they were forced to move to the streets. Others have been on the streets because they feel that being in the CBD is closer to a lot of opportunities as opposed to staying in places like Khayelitsha and other parts of the Western Cape. The numbers have gone up.  And they are just going up every week. We keep on seeing new faces,” said Pote. Ladles of Love, a volunteer-run soup kitchen, handed out a total of 9 274 221 meals in the Western Cape between the start of lockdown and 21 November. Founder Daniele Diliberto said: “While lockdown regulations are easing, the demand for food is only increasing and I don’t believe this need will go away anytime soon. I don’t believe homelessness will ever go away. As we manage to get people off the street, unfortunately more will appear.” DM  Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 1 Could someone recommend a good nonprofit that addresses hunger in Cape Town and is recognized as charitable nonprofit (501(c)(3)) in US? That way we could help and not give on the street when we visit. (in Vermont, US now)