First published by Daily Maverick 168 weekly newspaper If one can watch/listen to this not even very good conman for more than a minute without understanding what kind of industrial-strength depravity and faded, low-brow showmanship straight from the C-grade movies from the 1970s is being paraded here, then the IQ verdict is mid-double figures, plus-minus not much. Should you be in possession of a functioning brain, it is just impossible not to see how singularly deprived this man is of any redeeming qualities, a truly astonishing feat on the planet where even the epic scoundrels have some kind of emotional connection with another life form. (A KFC bucket and Diet Coke can cannot return adulation, so they don’t count.) But if one can watch Trump, understand well who he is, and still support him, that right there is an ultimate EQ test failure. That means supporting literally every measure that was designed to harm humanity, to pollute/destroy the environment and condemn the world to irreversible climate change, to destabilise a planet in great need of cooling down, in every way. Like a true Bondian villain, Trump derives extraordinary pleasure in having his finger on the red button, in so many ways. His singular pursuit of personal gain is matched only by his disdain for science, decency and commitment to public service. His hatred for Obama reveals just how little this man is when he’s alone with himself. His only true commitment during his presidency was to try his dumbest best to undo Obama’s legacy. A small example: Many in America still relive their Davy Crocket/Daniel Boone dreams every hunting season by shooting everything wildlife that’s in their sights. For years, they were using lead bullets and often the vultures would feed on the carcasses and then die from lead poisoning. Obama did the right thing and banned the lead bullets, so the vultures do not die needlessly. Trump reversed that order. He didn’t know. He didn’t care. He only cared about ‘owning’ Obama and other ‘libtards’. Make them sweat under their lefty socialist whatever. Dead vultures, who gives a f***? They are ugly anyway. Trump proves that, when you have a hole in your heart, nothing can fill it. The full list of his failures transcends any single column or book. His evil is just so multifaceted, his failures are so vast and the damage so incalculable. And yet, he was voted for by almost 75-million people in the US and is adored by many millions more around the world. I do not agree with these US Trump supporters, but can understand why they are like that: life was tough on most of them for years, they were laughed at, and they thought burning everything might not be such a bad idea. Still, what I struggle to understand are the bulging-eye angry Trump supporters … in South Africa. Look, it could be the pandemic, his orange hair or his obvious racism (shithole countries…) that attracts our local people in search for someone to hate; I have received a lot of their mails for months now. Unlike in the US, these are mostly not down-and-out people whose worsening life circumstances drove them to open racism and hatred of the media. These are often well-heeled people who just happen to believe that Trump is the best president ever and, yes, we the media deserve to die every time we publish an unflattering article. And that’s what’s really bugging me. These people should know better. They should care about the world and be aware of the marching autocracies. They should be able to understand that it is not good if we keep denying the very existence of the global climate crisis. They ought to know that the world is not safer if America turns into an Idiocracy. They must understand that a humanity divided cannot stand. And yet, in the gardens of the fancy restaurants, on the rightwing, racist WhatsApp groups, through the squalour of the social media, the latest insane YouTube videos and the all-caps mails, they keep denying objective reality, perhaps in an effort to out-dumb their god-emperor even as he is about to be hauled out of the White House. I am genuinely puzzled by that. At the end, if you are intending to send me another angry/threatening mail or message, just take a number and join the queue. It turns out, you’ve found the way to beat your loneliness – you’re one of the many Trump supporters on this end of the world. You should not be proud of it, though. History will not be kind to both Trump and you, the people he conned. DM168 This story first appeared in our weekly Daily Maverick 168 newspaper which is available for free to Pick ‘n Pay Smartshoppers at these Pick ‘n Pay stores.  Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet