(Compilation image: Sahra Heuwel) Maverick Citizen’s Coronavirus Daily Digest has changed format to a Coronavirus Weekly Digest. Each Friday, the digest will summarise highlights from the previous week’s news about the Covid-19 pandemic in South Africa. While South Africa remains under Level 1 lockdown, stricter measures have been introduced in Nelson Mandela Bay – now officially a Covid-19 hotspot. The acting executive mayor, Thsonono Buyeye, met with President Cyril Ramaphosa on Wednesday to ask for an earlier curfew and that alcohol sales be curbed again. On Thursday evening Ramaphosa announced the new measures: a new curfew, curbs on the sale of alcohol and limits on public gatherings. Initiations will not go ahead in the city.  Health Justice Initiative asks for government’s vaccine plan The Health Justice Initiative has asked the government to share its plan to make sure all people who need the Covid-19 vaccine will have access to it. The organisation, dedicated to public health and law, continues to wait for a response nearly a week after the deadline. It has raised concerns about how the vaccine will be distributed equitably, given the inequalities in South Africa’s health system. It has committed to making the plan public once it receives a copy. Western Cape urges behaviour changes over holiday season The Western Cape has an “established resurgence” of Covid-19 across all districts, according to health department head Dr Keith Cloete at a press briefing on Thursday, when the province had 1,253 Covid-19 patients. Premier Alan Winde urged holidaymakers to change their behaviour this year and stick to handwashing, physical distancing and mask wearing. He said the province would increase the enforcement of Level 1 restrictions. Public messaging will be on the up and contingency plans will be created for each area.  Meanwhile, opposition parties took aim at the Western Cape provincial government’s treatment of budgets during the Covid-19 pandemic. They questioned why the two frontline departments – Health, and Transport and Public Works – had their budgets cut. DM/MC Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet