Nathaniel Julies. (Photo: supplied) Vorster Netshiongolo, 37, the third accused in the murder of Eldorado Park teenager Nathaniel Julies, was granted R10,000 bail by the Protea magistrates’ court on Friday 18 December. Netshiongolo’s bail hearing had earlier been delayed by the court after the magistrate raised concerns about transcripts. The problem seemed to be a transcribed recording in Netshiongolo’s previous bail application. His bail application was delayed again on Monday 14 December after a Covid-19 case was identified in court. On 28 September, the three accused police officers, who were attached to the Eldorado Park police station, were denied bail by the same court. All three accused are expected to appear in court again on 27 January after postponement of the matter pending further investigations. The State had opposed bail in the case, arguing that the accused faced serious charges and that the alleged offence fell under Schedule 6 of the Criminal Procedure Act as a serious offence. Netshiongolo — an Eldorado Park police station sergeant — faces charges of being an accessory to murder after the fact and defeating the ends of justice. “We are saying murder as an accessory after the fact in that the state alleges that after the third accused (applicant) was alerted to the crime, that he then tried to assist in concealing the crime,” National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) Gauteng spokesperson Phindi Mjonondwane said. Julies, who had Down’s syndrome, was gunned down near his home as he returned from a local store, having bought biscuits — his favourite treat. Ndyalvane and Whiteboy face charges of murder, possession of illegal ammunition, defeating the ends of justice and discharging a firearm in public. They were not granted bail. Netshiongolo’s coaccused — Sergeant Scorpion Simon Ndyalvane and Constable Caylene Whiteboy — have been accused by the State of colluding in a cover-up to conceal the alleged crime. Netshiongolo is accused of planting bullets at the scene of Julies’ death to make it look as if there was an earlier shooting between police and local gangs. The State also alleged that Netshiongolo covered the teenager’s blood with soil moments after the murder on 28 August despite being off duty sick on the day. The State expressed its confidence in its readiness for trial by the time the matter returns to court. The murder outraged Eldorado Park residents who protested and threatened to burn down the Eldorado Park police station. They called for the axing of the station commander and his team, claiming they colluded with criminals and drug lords. After each adjournment, Eldorado Park residents would chant ‘Justice for Nathaniel’ with their fists raised. Eldorado Park resident Larry Varrie said he had hoped the case would progress before Christmas. He said that prolonging the case would only traumatise traumatised Julies’ family further and pleaded that the accused tell the truth for the matter to be put to bed. “We want to know what happened, it hurts the mother and the father. We are actually wishing that by Christmas the truth will be on the table,” said Varrie. He said the community of Eldorado Park will not rest until they realise full justice for Julies. Eldorado Park community leader Keith Duarte said, “The Nathaniel Julies case has a bad impact on the community – knowing that this case was taken to IPID, now IPID has already done the investigations, and now the case is at court. What we don’t understand as a community is that the three suspects — why is it that the court proceedings do not start? Every time its technical issues, investigations incomplete, bail hearings. “We want this court case to continue in order for us to see justice. The community of Eldorado Park needs to see justice on law officers who violated Julies’ right to life,” said Duarte. Mjonondwane said the State was ready to proceed but the court should give the defence more time if required. DM   Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet