(Photo: Leila Dougan) Gauteng lost its Health MEC Bandile Masuku more than two months ago. He was accused of not providing oversight for a series of PPE tenders that nearly went to a family friend, Thandisizwe Diko, who is the husband of the currently “on long leave” presidential spokesperson Khusela Diko. Then the Gauteng ANC, which appeared nearly evenly split on the issue, instructed Premier David Makhura to appoint a new MEC. Makhura gave the impression of preferring to keep Masuku in stasis until proper investigations were completed, but he had no choice but to continue the search for a new MEC. Eventually, he decided on Nomathemba Mokgethi. However, as part of a provincial Cabinet reshuffle he also wants to appoint deputy Cogta minister and former Joburg mayor Parks Tau as the MEC for Economic Development. To do that, Tau needs to be a member of the Gauteng Provincial Legislature. To make way for Tau, a member, Thulani Ndlovu, was asked to resign his seat. He refused. On Wednesday morning it emerged that the Gauteng ANC Youth League had publicly objected to Ndlovu being told he would have to resign. There are many issues at play here. The Gauteng ANC Youth League says it does not believe a younger person should have to give up their position for an older person, no matter how important it is for Gauteng to have a full complement of MECs. This is astonishing. This group is happy to hold up this process, during a pandemic, simply because it will negatively affect one of their own. It is unthinkable that an ANC deployee could have behaved this way 10 years ago. It would simply not have been done – a person would have been told exactly how they were nothing compared with the party, how cold it is outside the ANC and why they had a duty to do what was being asked of them. They would also have been told that their future could well be determined by their current actions and would have been promised some kind of high office. None of that seems to apply any more. Of course, this is not the first time that an ANC deployee has ignored the party. It has happened many times in different ways. The first major public example was perhaps in Tlokwe (Potchefstroom), in 2012. Then, ANC councillors rebelled against their ANC mayor and abstained from voting, allowing the DA to win a no-confidence motion. It happened again in Tlokwe in 2013. In the end, each ANC councillor won an all-expenses-paid trip to a local hotel where they had an individual meeting with then-president Jacob Zuma and then secretary-general Gwede Mantashe. ANC’s Tlokwe Trouble – and why it may spell more trouble  It has happened in other places too, with ANC councillors voting against party orders. It happened in the Emfuleni Local Municipality last month, it happened in Nkangala in Mpumalanga last year and it happened in the Sol Plaatje Municipality around Kimberley before that. However, what may have changed is that there is now no fear of Luthuli House taking any action against someone who refuses to obey a party instruction. In the case of Ndlovu in the Gauteng Legislature, he knows that nothing will happen to him, and that his constituency, the ANC Youth League, will protect him. This issue around constituencies is key. As Ndlovu knows he cannot be touched, so Ekurhuleni Mayor Mzwandile Masina is able to tweet against ANC policy and in support of the EFF’s. This is now happening across the board. Leaders who are elected in charge of structures are able to defy Luthuli House in a way that is impossible for ordinary rank-and-file members. Nationalise, Command, Let the ‘White Economy’ Collapse: Where Malema leads, ANC’s Mzwandile Masina will follow  It was this dynamic that allowed the ANC Women’s League in North West to tell its members who are mayors to defy the ANC instruction to “step aside” when they were accused of corruption. The struggle to save the ANC from itself continues – with no visible results  However, that does not mean that individual members do not get away with it when they try it. The ANC’s former Nelson Mandela Bay councillor, Andile Lungisa, has openly defied instructions from the party, after the National Executive Committee (NEC) ordered him to resign and he refused. In the end, officials took no action until he started his jail term. And it is probably because of this paralysis that the Gauteng ANC Youth League was able to act in the way that it has. It has seen the failure of Luthuli House to act in other cases and knows it has nothing to fear here. Unfortunately, this situation is likely to get worse for the ANC. This weekend the NEC is due to debate whether Ace Magashule should “step aside” as secretary-general. He has said he will not do so voluntarily and will no doubt fight any attempt to remove him. An entirely possible outcome of this weekend’s meeting is that he remains in office or that there is a delay in his “stepping aside”. This will weaken the legitimacy of both him and his office. As a result, the ANC will find it even harder to enforce its will, and the chances of some structures – regions, provincial youth leagues or even provinces – being in outright rebellion will grow. This fire will be difficult to put out. The only way it can be done would be for a strong united leadership in the ANC, which could take and enforce action. This comes back to the NEC, which would have to back any decision to suspend and remove people who defy the party. This NEC, elected at Nasrec in 2017, appears unable to do that. Which means that this process of Balkanisation will continue, at least until the ANC’s next conference in 2022, and probably long beyond that. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 1 May the total collapse come sooner rather than later.