Chester 'Gummy' Malow communicates with a colleague through bullet-resistant glass. (Photo: Shiraaz Mohamed) Cash-in-transit heists are on the increase, forcing money-moving companies to look at new ways of protecting their product. Real-time video telematics and live video streaming are among the technologies being used to prevent – or at least mitigate – attacks on the cash-in-transit industry. Speaking during a tour of IziCash, a cash-in-transit collection and delivery service facility in Pretoria, CEO Albert Erasmus explained, “We have to do our utmost to curb these violent attacks on one of the sectors in which some of our most vulnerable fellow citizens earn their living. Cash is still the lifeblood of the South African economy.” South African Banking Risk Information Centre data shows there was a 29% increase in cash-in-transit heists between 2019 and 2020, with Gauteng and Mpumalanga undergoing increases of 173% and 46% respectively. Grant Clark, spokesperson for the Cash-In-Transit Association of South Africa, told Daily Maverick, “We already have 16 incidents above what we had last year and we still have this month (December) to go. Gauteng, like last year, is again the highest-hit province. It is very concerning. Loss of lives has also been extremely concerning this year. We lost 19 staff members this year within the industry.” Six years on the job and Chester “Gummy” Malow is well aware of the risk. “Every day when I leave my house, I know that I can get killed. I don’t take it for granted, nor do I become complacent.” It’s a dangerous job, but someone has to do it, Malow said when asked why he takes the risk. “Also, if you look at it, how many people are without jobs and I love what I do. The pay is good, but on the downside is that I don’t get to see much of my family. I start work at 4am and I get back at night. I don’t see my kids much. This is my line of work, either collecting or dropping off money.” Another guard, Rick Coutsoulis, said teamwork was essential. “The driver is in the van, he observes what is happening while we are with a client. The gunner stands and watches outside, and the runner who goes in to collect the cash also observes his surroundings.” Michael Lee, a gunner, added, “We have to have each other’s back all the time. That is why it is crucial to have a good relationship with the team. With us there is a brother bond, we look after each other. We are like family.” Meanwhile, Clark said that while there had been an increase in the number of attacks, cash losses were declining thanks to technology. “The technology the guys are using in their vehicles, which involves cash segregation and camera systems, is making it more difficult for the criminals to access the cash. Although they blow the vehicle up, they don’t get all the cash. Or they blow the vehicle up so badly that all the cash is destroyed.” IziCash employees handle large amounts of cash daily and use advanced money-counting, weighing and packaging machines. Every section is demarcated and in full view of the control room. There are safes within safes for storing the cash and the innermost safe is surrounded by floor-to-ceiling reinforced steel walls. The facility is surrounded by high walls with 24-hour guards. Armoured vehicles are equipped with state-of-the-art cameras and a tracking system that allows the control room to monitor their every movement in real time. This gives them a faster reaction time, in the event of an attack. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet