(Photo: Vincent Cruywagen) One of 50 troops who annually participate in the Tweede Nuwe Jaar street parade. (Photo: Vincent Cruywagen) Cape Town’s annual parade of minstrel troupes down Hanover Street (Keizersgracht), putting on a dazzling performance in front of the judges at City Hall and then proceeding down Adderley Street into Wale Street, has been provisionally postponed to 16 June 2021. The parade, a favourite holiday celebration dubbed the Mother City’s own Rio Carnival, attracts visitors from across the globe and the postponement is seen as a huge financial loss to the troupes and the tourism sector. Kaapse Klopse Karnival Association (KKKA) director Muneeb Gambeno said: “This carnival has massive importance to our people and in order to leverage the importance and impact that is had in our community, we couldn’t simply cancel it. The proposed new date was subject to the pandemic at that time. “Youth Day, 16 June, and the events that happened in 1976 resonate with the anti-apartheid resistance role that this carnival played, particularly during the initial years of the Group Areas Act when Klopse persisted to parade in areas which became prohibited to us.” Gambeno reiterated that the KKKA will use the parade to celebrate the events of 16 June 1976 and the important role of young people in society in general, as well as the Klopse. Many ordinary people of the Cape Flats, such as seamstresses and food vendors, depend on the economic opportunities from the carnival, he said, adding that a postponed event means they may still have an opportunity to trade at a large event such as the Klopse Carnival on 16 June 2021. “For now we have instructed the immediate cessation of all Klopse activities. We will re-evaluate matters on a periodic basis and will use the time to support and fortify the Klopse, who are in dire need of support as the pandemic has wiped out most of the resource channels they would typically leverage to fund their activities leading up to their participation in the Cape Town Street Parade and our annual competitions,” he said. The annual parade dates to the mid-19th century when the slaves in Cape Town were given one day off in the year. To celebrate, groups would dress up, wave parasols, strum banjos and make merry with music, dance and a parade from District Six area through the city centre. Many of the songs sung today go back to the 1800s. Fadiel Gasant, director of the Ashwin Willemse Orient Community Development Band, said: “Yes, we and all the troupes are going to miss the 2021 Tweede Nuwe Jaar Minstrel Street Parade. It is something that is part of our culture. “The troupes are going to feel it. But at the end of the day the postponement is in our best interest. If a child gets sick during one of our marches or practices then that parent will hold our troupes responsible.” Mayoral Committee Member for Economic Opportunities and Asset Management James Vos stressed that the tourism industry makes the world go around, but the world has been turned upside down by the Covid-19 pandemic. “At the beginning of this pandemic I established the Tourism Task Team to deal with the effects of the lockdown measures, to develop our bounce-back strategy and to provide input on my bespoke submissions to national government, motivating for the reopening of business and leisure to get businesses back to work,” he said. He said the Mother City’s vast cultural diversity is something to be proud of and celebrated. “Community-based tourism gives us an opportunity to do this and sets us apart from other destinations and cities in South Africa and globally. “The Khayelitsha Curated Route is a good example of what we can achieve through collaboration. To get his exciting product offer up and running, we partnered with tourism operators in the area, taking our knowledge of what is expected by international visitors and assisting the operators to craft a tourism product that showcases their community in a manner that is authentic. “So, my plan is to push community-based tourism opportunities to all corners of the city by ensuring visitors’ comfort, improving and diversifying products and experiences, stimulating demand, supporting and involving communities so they benefit, and planning for growth.” The KKKA and the Cape Town Minstrel Carnival Association have warned troupes not to hold marches in their areas and to adhere to the Covid-19 regulations. This includes band and other rehearsals. Non-compliance will lead to immediate expulsion. DM/MC Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet