FUNDA Art Cente on November 27, 2020 in Soweto, South Africa. According to media reports, the arts centre is appealing for donations as it is only left with limited financial support from National Arts Council and the the electricity has been cut off since 2009. The centre was founded in the early 1980's, initially directed by art educator and activist Steven Sack and associated with Prof Es’kia Mphahlele. Students have included the likes of Mbongeni Buthelezi, Lehlogonolo Mashaba, Vusi Mfuphi and the late Nhlanhla Xaba. (Photo by Gallo Images/Alet Pretorius) Founded in 1984, Funda Community College — which has produced award-winning fine artists — has been struggling financially. Now an art auction appears to be the institution’s last hope of keeping its doors open. It has produced the likes of Mbongeni Buthelezi and the late Nhlanhla Xaba, who won the Standard Bank Young Artist award in 1998. “At a time when black communities faced a dearth of opportunities within the arts sector, Funda provided practical solutions, such as the Bonono Fine Art Course, which offered education in disciplines such as drawing, painting, sculpture, printmaking and history of art,” wrote Phumzile Twala, an independent curator. Initially, Funda Community College, which is in Diepkloof, got funding from technology firm IBM, while the Urban Foundation donated the land the arts college is on. But for years the Funda Community College has struggled with funding. “Donations from the private sector have run dry, now [Funda] is only left with limited financial support from [the] National Arts Council,” said Tumi Moloi who is spearheading a fundraiser for Funda Community College. In a statement Charles Nkosi, the head of the fine arts department at Funda said that despite receiving private sector funding and some funding from the National Arts Council, they’ve always had “funding problems.” “On top of this, the electricity has been cut off since 2009 to date [Funda] is without power, teaching staff and security personnel go for months without pay and the state of facilities is deteriorating by the day,” the statement reads. Cedril Nukeri, a visual arts lecturer at Funda Community College, who hasn’t been paid for several months, said that it wasn’t “easy being committed to an institution for many years knowing that every month you’re not getting paid. But I’m still here because it’s a rich space that holds our heritage. “The money we do get isn’t consistent, one month you get paid, then four months can go by and you don’t get anything, but we all understand that the organisation isn’t generating money,” said Nukeri who last received a salary two months ago. Nukeri said that it has been challenging having to teach without electricity and that the lack of electricity also gives criminals “an advantage to vandalise the property and steal.” “We’ve learned to improvise. [Not having electricity] affects the curriculum. We used to do the research presentations with a projector or with the computers but now we can’t,” Nukeri told Daily Maverick. Vusi Mfupi, a painter, who attended Funda Community College in the late 1990s, said that the time “spent there was invaluable because it instilled the love and discipline I have for the arts.” Lehlogonolo Mashaba, an artist who was at the centre in 2003, said that the “facility is important because it introduces township kids to art in a context where they (otherwise) wouldn’t be exposed to it.” The limited funding resulted in music and theatre courses being cut from the curriculum. Currently only visual arts is being offered to about 50 students who pay about R1 500 per month for their fees. The I am Funda charity auction was started to raise money for the organisation. “My goal is to raise much needed funds for the future plans of the college – repositioning its curriculum to the modern arts and cultural landscapes, as well as restoration of campus facilities,” said Moloi. “It’s important that this auction gets all the support it needs because we need to restore the centre to its former glory,” said Nukeri who also studied visual arts at the institution. For the auction, artists are urged to donate their works in support of the initiative. Proceeds will go to Funda Arts Centre’s operations and the restoration of facilities. The I am Funda charity art auction is set for April 2021 in Johannesburg. Moloi said in total, Funda needs R10-million, which would help with upgrading facilities, but they’ll be approaching the private sector for this through their corporate social investments. Through the auction of 100 donated artworks it hopes to raise R4-million to cover its operational expenses.DM Artists can pledge their donations in writing or submit a letter of intent to fundaartauction@gmail.com. For more information, contact  Tumi Moloi tumimoloi6@gmail.com Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 1 A little help from Lootooli House?