More than R220-million of public money invested in the Estina Diary project to support poor farmers in the central province of Free State was siphoned off, including to accounts linked to the influential Gupta family, which had close links with politicians under former South Africa president Jacob Zuma, a report by the public protector has found. The Guptas have previously denied wrongdoing. Magashule, who was premier of Free State at the time and is now secretary general of the African National Congress (ANC), has faced a number of serious allegations and corruption charges for conduct during his tenure. On Monday Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane said she had concluded that individuals linked to the Guptas had “undue influence” on politicians and the project. Magashule and some of his colleagues had failed to execute their oversight responsibilities properly even after being notified of irregularities, and this amounted to “maladministration and improper conduct”, she said. Magashule’s lawyer did not respond immediately to a message seeking comment. Mkhwebane recommended that Magashule and several other members of Free State’s executive authority be given training on their accountability and oversight responsibilities and for her report to be taken into account by prosecutors conducting a criminal investigation into the project. Mkhwebane herself has faced criticism in some quarters. A series of court judgments have overturned some of her previous findings and she has also been accused of targeting allies of President Cyril Ramaphosa on behalf of an opposing ANC faction, which she denies. Magashule is from a group that has at times appeared at odds with Ramaphosa since he replaced Zuma in February 2018. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 6 This is rather like Bill Barr resigning 4 weeks before he is out of a job anyway in a bid to have the Public forget how he facilitated Trump’s abuse of power. A rather belated attempt to ‘correct’ the litany of bungling and inept actions of the PP ! Imagine advising on ‘training’ in “accountability and oversight” NOW – you must be joking ! Jail is the only option for this kind of grand corruption….including that of the PP ! Kaye’s observation is spot on . Any mention of Zwane in this report by the PP? Hahaha, talk about a euphemism if ever there was one. Improper conduct she calls that. What about theft on a grand scale would be much closer to the truth. What is this woman trying to do; make it “sort of right” but don’t give in to the truth? This is nothing but a devious and sinister move to exonerate Magashule and influence the outcome of his trial. It amounts to a rap on the knuckles when in reality, he is heavily involved in theft and corruption. Why now when she whitewashed the original report? Didn’t even mention him or Zwane. This woman is evil and poison, just like Magashule and all the wicked cronies around him and Zuma. Now there’s an archetypal DespySeR! – Desperately Seeking Relevance