The Foodie’s Wife’s famous Asparagus Crisp, two ways. (Photo: Tony Jackman) I got this recipe from a neighbour many, many years ago to serve as a starter. My family loved it and over the years it mutated into a pasta dish to serve four to six people, depending on how generous your portions are. So here are two ways to do it.  Ingredients 1 large tin or jar of asparagus pieces or spears 100 g butter 70 g flour 125 ml cream Liquid from the asparagus tin or jar Cayenne pepper, salt and pepper to taste Potato crisps (as much as you like) Grated Cheddar cheese for topping Method Drain asparagus and reserve the liquid. Place the asparagus spears or pieces in a buttered dish or small, individual dishes. Melt the butter in a saucepan and when bubbling add the flour. Remove from heat and gradually stir in the asparagus liquid a little at a time until finished. Return to heat and stir continuously until thickened. Add the cream and seasoning. Pour the liquid over the asparagus and cover with grated cheese. Crush the chips and sprinkle on top. Layer it a couple of times (crisps, cheese, crisps, cheese) for a crunchier topping. Bake at 200℃ for 15 minutes. Alternative recipe: To make a pasta dish, double up on all the ingredients, adding precooked pasta of your choice. Layer it with the asparagus, pour over the sauce and prepare the topping as above. Bake at 200℃  for half an hour. DM168/TGIFood Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Send your Lockdown Recipes to tony@dailymaverick.co.za with a hi-resolution horizontal (landscape) photo. Thank God It’s Food is sponsored by Pick n Pay. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet