Gareth Lingens, owner of the “House of Lights” in Weltevreden Park, Johannesburg has provided people with a visual festive treat for the past eight years. It has been a challenging year for his family; his wife has cancer. Despite their difficulties, they decided to keep the lights on this year. Said Lingens, “Emotionally it has been a very draining year for us. The build-up to me putting up the lights was exceptionally taxing because my wife had just come out of hospital. I am happy we went ahead and put up the lights because I cannot even explain how much it means to gain some life and emotional energy back from people by seeing the joy on their faces when they come and see the lights.” Admiring the lights with her two children, Merrilyn Bartleson said, “The lights are phenomenal. This is a teacher at my kid’s school and despite her cancer and through all of her suffering, she still wants everybody to have fun. They had a very difficult year but they still share this with people. This is the other side of humanity we are seeing now. They are doing a selfless thing, really they are doing an amazing thing.” Michelle Strydom, who hails from America but now resides in South Africa said, “We are used to lights and grew up with lights. I wanted my kids to experience it. It is a very happy feeling and it gets you in the holiday spirit.” Situated on 44 Biesie Avenue, Weltevreden Park, the lights are switched on daily from 7.15pm to 10.15pm till 31 December. Want to see more festive lights? The JHB Zoo is ideal: Its Festival of Lights is running till 3 January 2021. In conjunction with the City of Joburg, Joburg Theatre, City Parks and City Power, the festival is in its second year, featuring an enchanting collection of life-size animal characters, as well as classical musical entertainment. Visitor Mariska Shunmugam said, “The lights are very pretty but I feel they could have done a lot more, perhaps allowed us to see the animals in the zoo. But it’s ‘Christmassy’ and the rides are also very nice as it is all lit up.” Spokesperson for the Johannesburg Zoo and Parks Jenny Moodley said, “The Festival of Lights provides a unique opportunity during these unprecedented times for families to enjoy an evening of outdoor entertainment. It has been a long and hard year for us all and hopefully this will bring about some cheer.” Melrose Arch is also showing off with a light display in the streets and Retail Galleria. It has dazzling displays with baubles, fairies, a giant teddy bear, stars, lights and a reindeer. Their display can be viewed until 10 January 2021. DM  Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet