Illustrative image | Sources: Flickr / Gilbert Sopakuwa | Gallo Images The Covid-19 pandemic is one of the most devastating global health and economic crises in modern history. The crisis has affected virtually every facet of socioeconomic functioning, including public finance, which is concerned with the capacity of governments to mobilise resources, primarily for building institutions to promote security, competition and market development, as well as for redistributive purposes. The pandemic has significantly compromised Africa’s state of public finance. First, it led to unprecedented contraction of tax revenue. Second, it placed extreme stress on public spending as governments struggled to respond to the health crisis, including increased funding for the health sector, social and business relief, measures to reduce and combat the spread of the virus and various other related needs. Covid-19 poses tremendous challenges for Africa. However, it also offers opportunities for constructive change. Challenges for public finance in Africa The onset of the viral outbreak exposed and amplified existing weaknesses in public finance management in African countries. Inefficiencies and inequalities in the delivery of public services were magnified. The crisis also revealed a lack of preparedness when it comes to the ability to weather economic shocks and manage resources effectively. Poor GDP Growth The African Development Bank projects that real GDP growth could reach  -3% in Africa due to the Covid-19 pandemic – a collapse of about seven percentage points from the growth rate achieved in 2019, the worst outcome in the region since the 1990s. Reduced GDP growth means reduced mobilisation of taxes, adding fuel to macroeconomic instability and burden of debt. Given the weakened macroeconomic stability in Africa prior to Covid-19, trade restrictions, regional lockdowns and other Covid-19 measures impeding economic activities further compromise fiscal sustainability in the wake of the crisis. Rising debt levels Despite a recent rise in debt levels, the Covid-19 crisis forced many African countries to borrow even further to cope with the increased demands. According to the World Bank, public debt in emerging markets has surged to levels not seen in 50 years. Not only has the crisis worsened fiscal deficits for African countries, but it limits future borrowing capacity. This puts increased pressure on macroeconomic stability and fiscal sustainability, especially due to the need to continue dispensing large amounts of funds to combat the virus. The debt burden is further heightened by often high borrowing interest rates, exchange rates for foreign loans and other influential economic factors. Increased poverty and social needs High levels of African populations across all sectors suffered loss of earnings as a result of the pandemic. The World Bank estimates that the  Covid–19 pandemic will set back global poverty reduction goals by three years. The African Economic Research Consortium’s (AERC) recent work in five African countries showed that policy responses to contain the spread of the virus, such as lockdowns, closing down of some businesses, travel and mobility restrictions and so forth, led to an increase in poverty levels that washed out gains that had been made in the past decade. Most importantly, inequality worsened in the five countries as the burden of economic slowdown fell disproportionately on low wage earners, small business owners and casual labourers. Opportunities and the way forward for Africa Despite the dire situation, it is not all doom and gloom for Africa. This crisis has also revealed opportunities for positive change. There are some measures that can help move the continent forward: While the sheer destructive impact of the Covid-19 pandemic continues to resonate across the continent, we should not ignore the lessons learnt and the uplifting stories that have risen up through the crisis. Never have Africans come together the way we have during this catastrophic situation – we have seen the best of humanity through this trying period. International aid organisations, local charities and normal citizens showed compassion and care in helping out their fellow citizens. Healthcare and essential workers rose to the title of “hero” for the sacrifices they made to keep country processes going. African countries were lauded by our Western counterparts for the way we responded to the pandemic, including our swift action in imposing lockdowns. African governments did well overall when it came to educating the population on Covid-19 prevention measures, and hence helped save lives on a large scale. The road ahead for Africa is difficult, and the challenges undeniable. But for us to overcome, rebuild and move forward stronger than ever, we need to take an inspired and solutions-focused stance, and work together for the benefit of the continent and its people as a whole. DM Dr Abebe Shimeles is Director of Research at the African Economic Research Consortium (AERC).  Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet