By the numbers Innovation in crisis There is no doubt eaters everywhere relied on delivery more than ever this year, and helped support restaurants when the culinary community needed it most. And as part of our mission to help South Africans get more of what they needed this year, we launched Uber Essentials and Uber Connect. We also know that people have become more price-sensitive which is why we launched UberNam, a new more affordable option with the same door-to-door safety features, and Uber Pass, a monthly plan, which unlocks savings on Uber rides, Uber Eats delivery, and grocery orders through an all-in-one bundle of benefits. Most excitingly, South Africa was the first market in Europe, Middle East and Africa to receive this unique offering. A few food trends While this year’s circumstances made it difficult to spend quality time with loved ones, our customers found new ways to show love and share meals. Using the “Share my Delivery” feature, one eater even sent treats over 10,535 miles away from San Francisco to Johannesburg. And naturally, we noticed more than a few key food trends emerge this year: Safety focus Since our launch, we have launched over 20 unique safety measures to ensure that every trip taken can be as stress-free as possible. This year we announced innovative partnerships with Nisaa, non-profit, non-governmental organization, opposed to all forms of oppression, exploitation and violence against women, to raise awareness of gender, power dynamics, and sexual harassment among driver-partners and riders.  We also worked with A21,  a global anti-human trafficking organisation, to provide new resources and refreshed tips to drivers and delivery people so they can learn how human trafficking works, how it may present, and how they can report or reach out for help. While all trips have always been GPS tracked and every rider and driver have access to 24/7 in-app support, and an in-app emergency button, we also knew we had a responsibility to adapt to the new normal. We rolled out enhanced safety mechanisms including a pre-trip safety checklist, improved our feedback options to include health and safety feedback, and provided financial assistance to drivers and delivery-drivers who had been placed on quarantine by a medical professional. We also built innovative technology designed to verify that drivers on Uber and delivery people on Uber Eats are wearing a mask. Before starting to drive passengers or deliver food, they are asked to take a selfie showing their mouth and nose are covered. We firmly believe that accountability is a two-way street. That’s why we expanded the same technology to riders, too. If a driver reports to us that a rider wasn’t wearing a mask, the rider will be required to take a selfie with their face covered before they’re able to take another trip with Uber. With the addition of this new feature, one driver’s feedback can help ensure the safety of Uber for the next driver.  Looking ahead As we look ahead to 2021, we are excited to continue innovating and finding new ways to better serve our communities, riders, and driver-partners. Thank you for safely riding, driving and eating with Uber this year – we look forward to being a part of your 2021. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet