Sharks co-captain Tera Mtembu during the 2019 Currie Cup Rugby match between Sharks XV and The Blue Bulls at Newlands Stadium, Cape Town on 20 July 2019 ©Gerhard Duraan/BackpagePix Whether it was his memorable match-winning try for the Blitzboks to secure the bronze medal at the 2010 Commonwealth Games in Delhi, or that he is the first black player to captain the Sharks, or, if you look a bit further back, that he is the third most-capped first XV player in Dale College’s 159-year history with more than 70 caps – Tera Mtembu has made his mark on South African rugby. “I had forgotten about that try with the [Springbok] Sevens, but someone reminded me of it the other day,” Mtembu said. “I was so fortunate to have that experience at that time; a year earlier I was still at Dale and now I was on the global stage. The whole experience came at the right time of my life.” That moment was defining. It was the first time the South African rugby public took note of the then 20-year-old loose forward’s talent. He made his Currie Cup debut in 2011 and featured in Super Rugby in 2012. He never looked back until the end of his time at the Sharks a few weeks ago. Mtembu is now set to join New England Free Jacks in US Major League Rugby, under the tutelage of former Melbourne Rebels skills coach Ryan Martin, at the end of January 2021. His 10-year stay at the Sharks has been as much a source of frustration as it has been exhilarating. “There’s so much I look back on and I wish it had gone differently,” the 29-year-old said. “When I look back, it’s not the picture I expected when I started, but at the same time I wouldn’t change the picture. “When I started out I wanted to play one union in South Africa and I was able to do that. I don’t really care what anyone else says about what I could have done or could have achieved elsewhere. My heart is at ease, I had 10 happy years at the Sharks. “If anything points to the fact that I had a full career with the Sharks, it’s the full coaching circle I went through, Sean [Everitt] was my first coach here in 2010 and is now my last.” Injuries and unfulfilled potential The loose forward’s injuries were the tedious hurdle he struggled to clear for nearly half a decade – a heck of a long time. “A lot of people don’t know that I had seven knee operations in four years. I played in patches during those times and as a player you only improve with game time, so the injuries are the only thing that hampered my progress at the Sharks,” Mtembu explains. “I feel I could have done more had the injuries stayed away, but I can’t really change that now and to a large degree that is why I didn’t reach my full potential.” Mtembu has a good idea how he could have spared his body a little before joining the Sharks senior team in 2011. “My one regret was not playing more sevens rugby, because of the personal and skills development that came from being in that setup. I also think it might have saved my body and maybe the injuries would not have been as bad. I definitely wish I could have played a bit more in that format.” He acknowledges that even a longer stint with the Blitzboks might not have changed anything, but where injuries have ravaged careers, “what ifs” are common and sometimes hold water. American adventure Feeling like he had not had the opportunity to perform at the peak of his ability meant he had to go find his feet elsewhere, find purpose and start to enjoy his rugby again. In came the Free Jacks of Weymouth in Massachusetts with a three-year contract. “I remember when the whole thing of playing in Japan was starting to become bigger,” Mtembu said. “I used to have conversations with Ryan Kankowski and JP Pietersen and you could tell they enjoyed being a part of growing the game in Japan. It feels the same for me as rugby is one of the fastest-growing sports in America. “I want to be a part of that group that lends its experience to ensure the Free Jacks grow as a team and ultimately the entire league. In a way it will sort of be my way of reaching my full potential in the game.” As a youngster finding his way in Paul Treu’s sevens side 10 years ago, he joined the Las Vegas leg of the circuit, his only visit to America. “I didn’t really explore Las Vegas, or any other place for that matter, like the senior guys did, because as a youngster in the team my focus was on the rugby and I didn’t want to be distracted,” he said. “I think this will be my chance to do that now when I am away from rugby. “I really want to do a few things away from rugby when I am there. Catching an NBA, NFL and MLB game is definitely on the cards, obviously, after the [Covid-19] pandemic is under control. I also have a few friends I will visit.” Preparing for life after rugby Before he leaves, Mtembu is laying a foundation for a life after rugby. In fact he started long before 2020. He is working as a real estate intern for a company owned by former Sharks and Springbok flyhalf Butch James and another friend. “It’s something I started getting into a couple of years ago during injury lay-offs when I had a lot of free time. The interest has grown and Butch gave me this opportunity after I finished up with the Sharks at the end of October,” he says. “The plan is to be in America for seven months of the year, then when I am at home I will keep working at it and learning the ins and outs of the business. Then I will see what happens after my contract with the Free Jacks expires.” Mtembu leaves the South African game having achieved significant milestones. It may not be the picture he initially envisioned, but it has been beautiful. His exploits on his American sojourn are set to deliver similar milestones, personally and for the game. Everywhere he has played, he has left the place a little richer. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet