Porcupines. (Photo: Ian du Toit) The original recipe appeared a century ago, during the First World War, in an American community recipe book. Using this book during the Depression, home cooks showed what could be done with limited rations and tinned tomato soup. Shortly thereafter it also appeared in our country, cropping up in community recipe books from the 1930s to the 1980s, particularly in books from schools from Steynsburg and Napier to Bellville, Bloemfontein and Brackenfell. Porcupines also appear in What for Supper?, published in the jubilee year of the CPWAA (VLV-Kaapland). Mrs AJ Muller flavours the tomato with cinnamon and cloves. If you want to be more adventurous, I’ve provided a few ideas.  (Serves 4–6) Ingredients 30 ml oil 1 onion, finely chopped 2 cloves garlic, finely chopped 2 whole cloves 2.5 ml ground cinnamon 1 tin (400 g) cream of tomato soup or tomato purée (passata) 125 ml water 5 ml salt 2.5 ml pepper pinch of sugar to taste (the old recipe says 30 ml, but nowadays we prefer less sweetness) 500 g beef mince 125 ml uncooked rice 30 ml Worcestershire sauce salt and pepper to taste chopped fresh parsley or torn basil for garnishing Method Heat the oil over moderate heat and fry half the onion until soft and transparent. Add half the garlic, the cloves and cinnamon (and extra spices, if using) and sauté for 1 minute. Add the tomato soup or purée, water, salt, pepper and sugar, then heat until it starts simmering. Make the frikkadels while the sauce is simmering: Using a fork, lightly combine the mince, rice, the remaining onion and garlic, Worcestershire sauce, salt and pepper. Roll into small frikkadels. Place them in the sauce and simmer, covered with a lid, until the rice is cooked, 45–60 minutes, or in the oven for 60–90 minutes at 180°C. Remove the lid for the final 15 minutes. Remember to remove the whole cloves, garnish with chopped herbs and serve on mashed potatoes. Bring it up to date Van die hand na die mond. Monument parish, Bloemfontein; What for Supper?, CPWAA, 1954. DM/TGIFood From Share, by Errieda du Toit, published by Struik Lifestyle. Photography by Ian du Toit. Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Send your Lockdown Recipes to tony@dailymaverick.co.za with a hi-resolution horizontal (landscape) photo. Thank God It’s Food is sponsored by Pick n Pay. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet