While Nelson Mandela Bay police and local law enforcement agencies praised communities for staying away from beaches, police were called in to break up a huge street braai and drinking party in Kwazakhele on Wednesday. (Photo: Naashon Zalk / Bloomberg via Getty Images) Eastern Cape provincial police commissioner Lieutenant-General Liziwe Ntshinga has issued a stern warning to residents of Nelson Mandela Bay after law enforcement officers were called in to break up a massive street braai in Kwazakhele on Wednesday 16 December. It was the first day of the province’s beaches being closed under the latest pandemic lockdown regulations. Police received complaints from residents about a number of parties in their neighbourhood, centred on taverns and a local shisa-nyama (braai takeaway outlet). When the cops arrived and tried to break up the festivities, they were pelted with stones and had insults yelled at them. “When the police were called to intervene in the situation, they found scores of people overcrowding taverns and overflowing to the streets, where their drinking binge continued uncontrollably,” said police spokesperson Brigadier Tembinkosi Kinana. “More concerning is the fact that these people are coming out of taverns and braai places which are expected to act responsibly and manage their patrons without the necessity to involve the police.” “The spilling over of the people to the roads has resulted in drunk, loud and disorderly conduct. It is unfortunate that, even when the police arrived to reason with patrons, they were met with hostile attitudes,” said Kikana. Ntshinga said: “The SAPS recognises the rights of individuals to enjoy themselves during these festive season holidays, but such rights must be exercised within the parameters of the law. All those found to be not complying with the Disaster Management Act regulations and Covid-19 stipulated protocols, which include the wearing of masks, observing the social distance and curfew regulations, will be prosecuted. Such behaviours are unacceptable and unnecessarily risking the lives of innocent and responsible people who respect the law.” Ntshinga said police officers had encountered support and compliance with the beach ban throughout the province. In November, a report for Minister of Health Zweli Mkhize highlighted how the local municipality’s law enforcement arm, the Metro Police, had on separate occasions found hundreds of patrons drinking and dancing in the streets of Nelson Mandela Bay without regard to physical distancing and without wearing masks. Nelson Mandela Bay metro’s mayoral safety and security committee member John Best said he had received a comprehensive briefing on law enforcement initiatives that took place on Wednesday, and he had personally observed some operations. “I am especially encouraged by the widespread civil obedience as our beach closures were adhered to. However, we did experience problems where alcohol was consumed in vehicles outside taverns and social activities beyond the 10pm curfew. “Our colleagues at the South African Police Services, in collaboration with our Metro Police, responded appropriately to address the situation. We would like to appeal to residents to adhere to the 10pm curfew as the Minister of Health reported another major spike in infections. Our law enforcement efforts will continue unabated to ensure compliance,” said Best. He said he believed there was widespread confusion over the 10pm curfew in the metro: “Reports from our law enforcement deployees indicate that there is still widespread confusion regarding the correct start time of the curfew as per the Disaster Management Act. It is an hour later for other regions. We were informed that numerous members of the public told law enforcement officers that they thought the curfew only started at 11pm, which is obviously not the case.” Nelson Mandela Bay, the metro comprised of  Port Elizabeth, Uitenhage and Despatch, was declared a coronavirus hotspot by President Cyril Ramaphosa at the beginning of December after a severe outbreak of Covid-19 infections. As part of restrictions imposed on hotspots, a curfew of 10pm was set for the metro — with a ban on post-funeral parties and retail alcohol sales from Friday to Sunday. Social gatherings indoors are limited to 100 people and outdoors to 250 people. The metro’s beaches were closed from 16 December. This week, the National Institute for Communicable Diseases noted that there had been a significant drop in new cases in the metro. Only 169 new cases had been reported in the past 24 hours. The number of active cases stands at 2,209. DM/MC  Like what you’re reading? Sign up to the Maverick Citizen newsletter and get a weekly round-up sent to your inbox every Tuesday. Free. Because paywalls should not stop you from being informed. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet