Former CEO Sandile Nomvete. (Photo: Gallo Images / Financial Mail / Robert Tshabalala) The board of Delta Property Fund has taken a page out of Steinhoff’s playbook in informing shareholders about a forensic investigation that points to accounting failures and fraud at the real estate company. And the shady goings-on at Delta, which owns a range of office properties that are largely occupied by government departments and entities, possibly implicate former executives. The group put out a JSE Sens updated cautionary on the matter after the market closed on Wednesday, December 9, which also noted that the probe and subsequent forensic report has resulted in the withdrawal of its 2020 annual financial statements. Delta’s share price plunged more than 31% in morning trade on Thursday as the market digested the news. In Steinhoff’s case, the board appointed PwC to investigate the retailer’s affairs after it admitted to “accounting irregularities” – à la fraud – in 2017 under the watch of former CEO Markus Jooste. Meanwhile, the Delta board appointed Mazars Forensic Services to conduct a forensic investigation into alleged procurement irregularities and misappropriation of funds at the company by senior executives, including former CEO Sandile Nomvete. The problems at Delta came to a head on 25 August 2020 when the company was left leaderless because Nomvete and Shaneel Maharaj (CFO) resigned with immediate effect. The pair left Delta after the conclusion of a preliminary internal investigation into the company’s affairs. Adding insult to injury, Delta COO Otis Tshabalala also abruptly left the company, electing to not complete his notice period that was initially announced at the beginning of July. The Delta board has since followed in the footsteps of Steinhoff as it decided to not publish the Mazars forensic investigation report – even though it makes adverse findings relating to how shareholder funds were allegedly misused. Bad business decisions by management have eroded shareholder value as Delta shares have fallen by 42% so far this year. Delta shares have gone from highs of R9.60 – shortly after it listed on the JSE in 2012 – to becoming a penny stock, finishing at 28 cents on Thursday, 10 December. Legal privilege Delta told shareholders on Wednesday that the Mazar forensic report will not be released as it is “confidential and subject to legal privilege” – a line used by Steinhoff after PwC, in a 7,000-page report, revealed a web of fraud at the retailer. Companies that want to guard forensic reports against going public cite “legal privilege” because, in principle, legal advice from a lawyer (firm conducting a forensic investigation with the help of lawyers) to a client (the company that initiated the investigation) is confidential. And that a company paying another to conduct a forensic investigation, allows it to call the shots about whether a report can be released. The “legal privilege” excuse has been used by others: Sasol when it commissioned a review of delays and cost overruns at its US-based Lake Charles chemical project and EOH, which suffered years of corruption. Back to Delta. The forensic investigation by Mazar has “found evidence of past practices involving governance failings and wrongdoing at the company, including unsubstantiated payments, procurement irregularities and other unethical business dealings”. These shady business dealings by Delta senior executives total some R46-million. The Delta board says it has reported the alleged fraudulent activities to the police and other authorities for further investigation and the possible prosecution of implicated senior executives. Nomvete previously told Business Maverick that he wants access to all forensic reports to possibly challenge them. Among key issues identified in the Mazar report were: Delta said the failure to properly recognise commission and other real estate expenses is likely to result in the value of the company’s investment property decreasing from R10.6-billion to about R8.7-billion in the financial statements for the year to February 2020. In other words, the value of its investment property could have been artificially inflated through crafty accounting practices. More worrying is that this has resulted in Delta’s auditor, BDO, withdrawing its audit opinion for the 2020 financial statements. The board has also withdrawn Delta’s 2020 financial statements, saying they can no longer be relied on due to inaccuracies. This accounting and audit nightmare has pushed the Delta board to delay the release of interim results to the end of August 2020. They were meant to be published on 11 December. DM/BM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet