You have got your eye on the latest iPhone, but want to get the most back for your old one to help finance the replacement. But where do you start? Gumtree can be a minefield of challenges when selling to strangers, but what other options are there? Whether you have got your eye on the budget-friendly iPhone SE or latest iPhone just announced, why not go to the source and sell it back to iStore with their trade-in programme. iStore gives you one of the best trade-in values for your iPhone worldwide, making your upgrade to a new iPhone more affordable than ever. We did some research globally to compare the values paid on secondhand iPhones in different countries and iStore tracks tops – giving you over R2 000.  *The prices were converted into South African Rand at the time of writing in order to give you a direct comparison to local iStore Rand prices. Pricing was sourced from major trade in services and retailers in the respective countries. I am sure you are wondering about the process of trading in and how much hassle it might involve. iStore have two options for you, which are both simple to get done. You can either pop into your local iStore with your phone or trade-in online from the comfort of your home. If you, like many, enjoy having some options with how to spend your trade-in value – it’s great to know that iStore offers multiple ways in which to spend the money you get back for your old phone. You can trade-in immediately to discount the purchase towards a new iPhone or other products, or use it towards reduced monthly cellular contract payments on your Vodacom, MTN or Telkom contract – no matter whether you initially took out that contract from iStore. You can also get an iStore voucher to use at a later stage. You could get up to R12,000 back when trading in your old iPhone and pay up to R420 less each month on your contract. Find out how much you can get back for your old iPhone here. If you have multiple Apple products that you would like to upgrade, the good news is that you can trade in up to 5 Apple devices at once towards the purchase of any new product. The multi-product trade-in is done in-store and offers all the same ways in which to spend your earnings from your old products. You might just be wanting to get some money back for your older product, but you should also consider this as a great way to ensure you can afford to upgrade to a new iPhone every year. Who would say no to that? DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet