The special purpose acquisition company, or SPAC, could focus on targets in the technology, media, telecommunications and financial technology sectors, according to the filing with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Golden Falcon said it would target companies headquartered in Europe, Israel, the Middle East or North America. Freidheim was a former chief administrative officer of Lehman Brothers. Azar, a former EMEA chairman of Barclays Plc, was at Lehman before that. Xavier Rolet, former chief executive officer of the London Stock Exchange Group Plc, is serving as a director of Golden Falcon. High-profile business figures across industries have increasingly turned to SPACs as a way to quickly raise capital for dealmaking. SPACs have raised more than $70 billion in IPOs this year, eclipsing previous records, according to data compiled by Bloomberg. While almost all of that money has been chasing takeovers in the U.S., there is a growing number of SPACs looking for opportunities in Europe. For More: Niel, Pigasse Seek as Much as $360 Million for Consumer SPAC Klaus Kleinfeld, the former CEO of Arconic Corp., is planning a blank-check company that could raise more than $300 million, people familiar with the matter have said. French billionaire Xavier Niel and two partners are seeking to raise as much as 300 million euros ($362 million) via a vehicle to be listed on the Paris stock exchange. Golden Falcon’s listing is being managed by EarlyBirdCapital Inc., UBS Group AG and Moelis & Co. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet