Ginger drizzle cake. (Photo: Louis Pieterse) Ingredients 1 ½ cups unbleached stoneground cake wheat flour 1 tsp baking powder 1 tsp ground cinnamon ½ tsp mixed spice ½ tsp ground cloves 1 scant tsp salt ½ cup buttermilk 2 tsp vanilla essence 1 cup treacle sugar (or caramel or brown sugar) 110 g soft butter ½ cup golden syrup 2 extra large eggs, beaten 40 g fresh ginger, peeled and chopped into tiny pieces 45 ml water 90 g sugar Method Sieve the flour into a bowl with the baking powder, spices and salt. In a separate bowl, stir the buttermilk and vanilla essence together and set aside. In a large baking bowl, cream together the treacle sugar and butter, using a wooden spoon. Add the golden syrup and chopped ginger and combine well with a wooden spoon. Add the beaten eggs, one at a time, and combine well. Add a third of the flour mixture to the sugar/butter/golden syrup mixture, mix well, then half of the buttermilk mixture. Then add another third of the flour mixture, combine, then the remainder of the buttermilk mixture, combine, and finally fold in the remainder of the flour mixture. Grease a 22 cm x 12 cm (more or less) loaf tin well with butter. Pour in the batter and smooth it out. Bake for about 55 minutes, then leave on a rack out of the oven. While it’s cooling, heat the 90 g sugar and 45 ml water in a saucepan on the stove. When dissolved, add the ginger bits. Simmer gently for 4 to 5 minutes and then turn off the heat. Make about 12 holes all over the cake, until about halfway down, with a slim skewer. Pour the syrup over. Leave to cool before removing from the tin. DM168/TGIFood Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Send your Lockdown Recipes to tony@dailymaverick.co.za with a hi-resolution horizontal (landscape) photo. Thank God It’s Food is sponsored by Pick n Pay. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet