The ANC’s national executive committee (NEC) must suspend its secretary-general Ace Magashule if he does not step aside after being charged with corruption, the party’s Integrity Commission has decided. The Integrity Commission of the ANC has recommended to the NEC, its highest decision-making body between conferences, that it immediately implement the so-called “step-aside” rule where leaders charged with a criminal offence must step down from their positions. ANC IC SG Report Final In a whistle-fast, 3-page finding made after Magashule met the Integrity Commission on Saturday, 12 December,  the Integrity Commission said that the party’s reputation was being harmed in the public eye and that Magashule must do as he told them he would: “never resist the decision of the NEC even if he might not agree with it”. The NEC decision of August 2020 says “Cadres of the ANC who are formally charged for corruption or other serious crimes must immediately step aside from all leadership positions in the ANC, legislatures, or other government structures pending the finalisation of their cases.”  The party’s national executives in August instructed the officials at Luthuli House to develop step-aside guidelines but in over 100 days they did not do so. The Integrity Commission has said that even in the absence of these, Magashule can be instructed to step aside. The ANC now has to call an emergency national working committee meeting or a broader national executive committee meeting to deal with the Integrity Commission report. Magashule told the Integrity Commission at its meeting on Saturday that he would step aside if instructed by the NEC. Media reports on Sunday alleged that the Integrity Commission had been persuaded by Magashule’s version of events and that no immediate action would be recommended against him.  Those reports appear to have been disinformation.  DM  Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 10 A decisive step in the right direction – the struggle for the heart and soul of the ANC is far from over “… has recommend…” what odds the NEC will follow this? There must be a dozen NEC members teed up for stepping aside Let us wait and see what happens next. Maybe Elias S. Magashula just wants a weekend off. A great small step in the right direction and good riddance to bad rubbish. Let hope this is the start of getting rid of these vile evil scumbags, who masquerade as caring for the people and who believe that they are untouchable and act with contemptuous impunity. The law must act decisively and slam these degenerates in prison. I am not holding my breath. You stole my comment.. But it’s going to be a fun few weeks and months..
Waiting for clown Carl to step in.. RET rules “Integrity” and “ANC” are like oil and water – don’t mix well. It was only last week that implicated members were obtaining legal opinions regarding the enforceability of the “Step aside” resolution. They seem to be missing the point that ethics and integrity have absolutely nothing to do with what is legally enforceable, but rather what is morally right. Ethics is doing the right thing even when no one is watching. Compliance with the law is the minimum standard. However, these concepts are totally foreign to most ANC members. The ANC IC took the correct decision, but I doubt if anything will happen to AM – it will be postponed until they have had further discussions next year – after all the ANC cannot act on a “Leaked” document as it’s not official! In the meantime Ms Gumede has been reinstated to her position in KZN. The ANC has lost its morality and backbone; so rapidly sliding into “Banana Republic” status. It should re-name itself the “Accept National Corruption” party. Love that name. Very appropriate Let’s see how this works?/! Mr. Magashule is finally forced to face the Integrity Commission, who then need to instruct the NEC to force him to step ASIDE? Despite all the clauses in the ANC Constitution claiming it to be an ethical and moral organisation, it is amazing that their top administrator appears to be woefully ignorant of these! At this stage Mr. Magashule should be facing an ANC internal disciplinary hearing, whereafter, if found wanting, he should be forced to step DOWN! No wonder all the rotten apples below him boldly stay in their elevated posts, with little or no action taken against them.