Orlando Pirates celebrate victory after the MTN8 final against Bloemfontein Celtic at Moses Mabhida Stadium in Durban on Saturday. (Photo: Samuel Shivambu / BackPagePix / Gallo Images) Orlando Pirates have successfully claimed their first piece of treasure after six long years of fruitless searching. They won the MTN8 trophy on Saturday evening, repelling the threat of Bloemfontein Celtic. The 2-1 victory for the Sea Robbers, courtesy of goals from Deon Hotto and a Thembinkosi Lorch penalty, handed them their first piece of silverware since 2014. The last time they won the MTN8 was in the 2011/2012 season. Josef Zinnbauer, the man who orchestrated the victory for the Buccaneers, was elated. “I’ve learnt a lot since being here. It’s a good experience for both me and the team,” the German coach told SuperSport after the game. “We are happy. We have a title. It’s important for us. It’s important for the supporters. They were so hungry for a title and I think nine years ago we last won the MTN8 and now we have done it again.” This was the 50-year-old’s first piece of silverware in his career, and he dedicated the trophy to his son Fabio. The younger Zinnbauer was involved in a car crash in Germany last month, which left him in a coma. “This is for my son, Fabio. I thank God for this game, but I hope you give me my son back,” said the former Hamburg manager. The beginning of a new era? Ever since Dutch coach Ruud Krol was forced to walk the plank, trophies have been scarce for Pirates. Under Krol, Pirates won six trophies in two seasons, but his contract was not renewed after that. Since then, it’s been slim pickings for the Sea Robbers. Before this success, they had only won two pieces of silverware; the MTN8 in 2012 and a Nedbank Cup in 2014. They fell at the final hurdle a few times. Between 2015 and 2018 they reached four major finals, but failed to win a single one. Now Zinnbauer has all the resources available to him to build a crew that can strike fear into their rivals. Thulani Hlatshwayo, one of those crew members who was recently brought aboard the Pirates ship after Bidvest Wits sank last season, is hopeful they can go even further after this success. “It’s overwhelming. In our first season, [we have our] first cup. And we’re hoping for more. Obviously now the focus goes back to the league, because we haven’t really got into the momentum of the league,” said the man who captained the team in the absence of Happy Jele, who was out with a minor illness. Hlatshwayo’s hopes that this is the beginning of future success were echoed by Pirates’ administrative officer, Floyd Mbele. “It’s been a long time coming. Our supporters deserve this. From the chairman, the board of directors, the management, the players, the backroom… Everyone really has worked hard for this. And it’s a sign of good things to come,” Mbele told Supersport. Undoubtedly, the ultimate treasure for the Bucs would be the Premiership. They were runners-up in 2017/2018 and 2018/2019 and finished third last season. Winning it this season would be the first time they’ve won the marathon since Krol’s tenure, eight years ago. This victory will give Zinnbauer and his men the belief that they can go all the way. Of course, it will be anything but smooth sailing from here onwards. The championship looks set to be fiercely competitive. And Mamelodi Sundowns, who did the league three-peat last season, are once again favourites. Withered roses For Bloemfontein Celtic, the team from the City of Roses, it’ll be a matter of putting their double disappointment aside and putting all their energy into the league. The MTN8 final loss for John Maduka’s charges was the second consecutive final they had lost in the space of three months, after they were beaten in the Nedbank Cup by Sundowns. In this latest final, it was always going to be an uphill battle for Maduka’s men after they had Ronald Pfumbizai sent off for giving away the penalty which proved to be the match-winning goal. But they gave a good account of themselves and had Richard Ofori in the Pirates goal working for his pay. “It’s football. It’s one of those things. I think the boys gave their best. It was not an easy game. But we are proud of ourselves that we managed to compete. You could see in the second half we were on top of them, but it was only the goal that was missing,” said Maduka after the game. They now have to take that momentum into the league, where they languish in 14th position after three losses from their first five games. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet