The European Parliament has set a Sunday deadline for officials to reach an accord. The EU’s chief Brexit negotiator, Michel Barnier, said it would be “difficult but possible” to reach an agreement on Friday, according to AFP. Earlier, he said the talks had made good progress — but warned that “last stumbling blocks remain.” Read more: Brexit Talks Head for Their Climax With a Fight Over Fishing Key Developments: (All times are U.K.) With @BorisJohnson we took stock of the EU-UK negotiations. We welcomed substantial progress on many issues. Yet big differences remain to be bridged, in particular on fisheries. Bridging them will be very challenging. Negotiations will continue tomorrow. Sent via Twitter for iPhone. View original tweet. Cabinet Office Minister Michael Gove told a House of Lords Committee that the deadline for getting a deal will be in the days immediately after Christmas. “Of course, the EU can apply provisional application of the treaty,” he said, referring to the process allowing the EU to implement a deal before it’s formally ratified by the European Parliament. In London, Parliament could be recalled from its vacation to approve any Brexit deal rapidly. “We will want to ensure Parliament has a say and a chance to scrutinize any agreement,” Gove said. The EU-U.K. joint committee agreed that the Withdrawal Agreement and the Protocol on Northern Ireland — part of the Brexit divorce deal agreed last year — will be implemented as planned in January. The move was a formality after the U.K. withdrew its controversial plans to break international law by rewriting the Brexit divorce agreement. The Bank of England kept its asset purchase program unchanged on Thursday. Policy makers reiterated that some disruption from Brexit was likely at the turn of the year, but otherwise focused more on the impact of the coronavirus in the near term. They extended a loan program for small businesses by six months, arguing that would help lending to the real economy. Read more: BOE Ready to Act If Brexit Talks End With No-Deal While the U.K. remains committed to seeking a deal with the EU, the most likely outcome of the talks is still no deal, Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s spokesman, Jamie Davies, told reporters in London. Michel Barnier told meeting of members of the European Parliament that it will be “difficult but possible” to reach a post-Brexit agreement by Friday, AFP reported, citing unidentified sources. The EU’s chief negotiator noted that difference persist on fisheries, a subject that is particularly sensitive for France and the Netherlands. The European Parliament said it will hold an extraordinary plenary session in late December to ratify any Brexit deal — as long as one is struck by midnight on Sunday. Technically, a deal could be implemented provisionally even if the European Parliament hadn’t voted on it. Alternatively, Barnier has suggested Britain could face a short period after Dec. 31 without a trade deal in place while it waited for the European Parliament to vote on it. Manfred Weber, head of the European People’s Party, said the European Parliament should only ratify a deal if it gets it by Sunday. “The agreement is too important to rush through,” he tweeted. “We owe it to the people and businesses in our constituencies who will be heavily affected by Brexit to scrutinize the deal appropriately. After Sunday, we don’t believe this would still be possible.” Read more: A Brexit Vote on Christmas Day? The Dash to Ratify Any Agreement The U.K. government said it will press on with its Internal Market Bill, despite it being rejected by the Scottish and Welsh parliaments. The legislation, which previously contained controversial provisions that would have allowed ministers to break international law, is designed to avoid trade barriers arising within the U.K. after Brexit. Lawmakers in Scotland and Wales have said the bill constitutes a power grab by Westminster, and will force them to accept products in their markets even if they’re made to lower standards. The Welsh government has threatened legal action against the U.K. if it proceeds with the bill. In this final stretch of talks, transparency & unity are important as ever: Debriefed @Europarl_EN Conference of Presidents this morning on negotiations. Good progress, but last stumbling blocks remain. We will only sign a deal protecting EU interests & principles. pic.twitter.com/L25PWCKYAG — Michel Barnier (@MichelBarnier) December 17, 2020 U.K. Cabinet Office Minister Michael Gove said negotiators are working “day and night” to reach a trade deal with the EU. “We will be doing everything in order to secure a good free trade agreement,” Gove told the House of Commons on Thursday. “We’re going the extra mile to continue the negotiations.” Parliament — which begins its Christmas vacation later Thursday — could be recalled next week to approve any deal, Gove said. The Trump administration is in talks with the U.K. to sign a mini-deal to reduce tariffs, U.S. Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer told BBC News. Nissan Motor Co. has opted to ship an upcoming electric vehicle to Europe from Japan rather than produce it in the U.K., where one of its largest factories faces an existential risk from a hard Brexit. Read more: Nissan Decides Against Making EV in U.K. Over Brexit Worries Britain’s top retailers and food manufacturers are demanding lawmakers investigate disruption at U.K. ports that has caused shipping costs to soar and raised doubts over the stability of supply chains after the country completes its split from the EU. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet