When it comes to keeping the kids entertained, more is more. So here are some of the top-rated and most popular kids’ shows on Showmax that you can download for your kids to watch offline later – while you’re travelling, at your remote holiday house or at Granny and Grandpa’s house where there’s no Wi-Fi. From Boomerang classics and Disney fan favourites to Nickelodeon adventures and brand-new shows for pre-schoolers, tweens and teens that you won’t find anywhere else, Showmax has one of the most comprehensive kids’ line-ups around. Oh, and one more thing – every single title on Showmax is available for downloading. There are no restrictions on what you are able to download.   In the not too distant future, the last African elephant has just disappeared. Meanwhile, in Canada, an alien craft crashes on the farm home of four foster children. Inside is an alien who crosses the galaxy collecting Endlings, the last creatures of their kind. The kids embark on a series of conservation adventures. Download now »   This sweet series for younger kids follows energetic seven-year-old Abby Hatcher and her friends, the Fuzzlies, crazy creatures that live in her family’s hotel. With her best friend Bozzly, she goes on wild adventures, trying to fix all the mishaps caused by Fuzzly mischief. Download now »   Quiet time for toddlers is taken care of with this sweet show that teaches little kids letters, numbers, colours and more through songs and animation. There’s a recurring cast of characters to get to know, from cute farm animals to inquisitive baby JJ and his caring family. Download now »   When a mysterious meteor crash lands in Adventure Bay, the Paw Patrol pups gain special powers. These really come in handy as they have to race against time to rescue Ryder and save the day. Download now »   Ryder and his pup pack, including firefighter-in-training Marshall and wannabe police-dog Chase, spring to action to save the day in Adventure Bay. Whenever you’re in trouble, just yelp for help! Download now »   Julia Donaldson and Axel Schaeffer’s classic tale comes to life in a delightful animation featuring some top British talent. Also on Showmax are The Gruffalo’s Child, Room on the Broom, Stick Man, The Highway Rat and The Snail and the Whale. Download now »   Pablo may have autism, but that doesn’t stop him from tackling the world. With the help of his imaginary friends, who he creates with his crayons, he learns that he can handle whatever comes at him. Download now »  Lena the ballerina is on the cusp of fame in the year 1905 – until her boyfriend gives her an old family necklace that transports her to the 21st Century. While trying to find a way back home, she learns how to fit into the modern world – and realises that she might not want to go back at all. Download now »   Roald Dahl’s hilarious twists on classic fairy tales were brought to life by Cape Town-based Triggerfish Animation in collaboration with Magic Light Pictures in this delightfully gory series that was nominated for an Oscar and won 15 major international awards. Download now »   Big Nutbrown Hare and his son Little Nutbrown Hare live happily together and always look for different ways to show their love for each other. Illustrated in beautiful watercolours, this is an inspiring and entertaining show. Download now »   Finn and Jake are the heroes of Ooo, a land filled with quests and monsters to be vanquished. Whether it’s the evil Ice King or doing an errand for the lovely Princess Bubblegum, there is always a new adventure waiting for them. Download now »   Mordecai wants to do a good job as a groundskeeper, but he’s lazy. Rigby, his pal, is always looking for trouble – and trouble is what they find. How these guys aren’t fired yet is anyone’s guess… Download now »   It’s Christmas in the Pig household and everyone is invited for a great big party! Who will show up and what gifts will they bring? And is there a chance we’ll see Santa Claus himself? Download now »   Garfield has to survive a Christmas on the farm with Jon’s family. And everyone on the farm wants to be active! Fortunately, there are plenty of naps and good food to help him cope. Download now »   Nella isn’t your average princess. She is a princess-knight and with the support of her friends solves problems around her kingdom. No matter what happens, Nella stays true to herself. Download now »  Stream or download these and more much-loved children’s shows on Showmax » DM/ML  Read this article for more. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet