Academic and DA MP Belinda Bozzoli. (Photo: Twitter / @WitsUniversity) Democratic Alliance MP Belinda Bozzoli was described as “an illustrious academic and strategic leader” by her former employer Wits University after her death was announced by the DA on Saturday. Before she became an MP and shadow minister for higher education and training Bozzoli was an academic, who, said Wits, contributed immensely to the prestige and reputation of the university. “She was instrumental in the establishment of six 21st century research institutes at Wits,” the university said. Bozzoli began her career in the Faculty of Humanities and ascended to the position of head of the Department of Sociology in the late 1990s before leading the School of Social Sciences from 2001 to 2003. She completed her Bachelor of Arts and honours degrees at Wits and then studied for her masters and PhD at the University of Sussex. She was an Associate Fellow at Yale University from 1978 to 1979. “She was active and collaborated with colleagues on many papers and projects. Her last years at the school were held concurrently with the position of deputy vice-chancellor (research) of Wits University,” the university said. In 2006 she was awarded an A-rating by the National Research Foundation for her commendable work as an academic administrator. An A-rating represents international and top-tier recognition in the academic and research field. DA MP and chief whip Natasha Mazzone said that as an MP Bozzoli was “deeply committed” to her work in Parliament. “She was deeply committed to making sure that higher education institutions remained respected and that as many young people as possible had access to excellent higher education,” Mazzone said. “Her work was that of a true patriot. A fighter of principle and true democrat. Belinda worked long into her illness, demonstrating her absolute commitment to South Africa and her caucus. “South Africa is poorer for not having Belinda fighting for their rights. May she rest in peace,” Mazzone said. Although the party did not disclose the illness Bozzoni succumbed to, News24 reported that she had a long battle with cancer. She was “kind, smart, knowledgeable, a voice of reason and love”, said DA MP Phumzile van Damme on Twitter. The ANC said Bozzoli “served her country with distinction, both in Parliament and in the academic world. Her voice and perspective will be sorely missed in the national discourse, especially on higher education matters.” DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet