First published in Daily Maverick 168 weekly newspaper 2020. The year the world changed. A year all our lives changed. A year of heightened concern, anxiety and birth, but sadly also a year of too many deaths, many more than usual. Deaths caused by a virus with a crown, called severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) by scientists, a virus which in turn causes coronavirus disease, also known as Covid-19. While the world was desperately searching for much-needed quick fixes and ammunition to slay the virus, the wall that stood between utter devastation, hunger and even more death, were people, ordinary people who look like all of us. But ordinary people who could not and did not simply sit at home. And this is why Daily Maverick had no hesitation in naming these “ordinary” people, the many superheroes who were the ones who picked up the cape when SA was on its knees and will have to muster another push as a second wave gathers energy, our People of the Year. Just as millions around the world have cheered health workers, we join them in cheering these incredible people, but add those in civil society, the many, many unknown and unidentified people, who have quietly been making sure people have food and water and a safe place to sleep. People who didn’t moan, but mobilised, energised and organised. It is impossible to name every person who we consider part of the People of the Year group, but it is important to highlight a few names that we believe represent the larger family who responded so valiantly. The Eastern Cape has not had a breather. Not only has its collapsing health system had to cope with high and relentless numbers of Covid-19 patients, but large swathes of the province have also been in the grip of a once-in-a-generation drought. And in many places where there has not been drought, a failure to maintain infrastructure has seen a collapse in the supply of drinking water. Hunger has been a daily reality. A toxic and devastating cocktail. When Covid-19 struck Nelson Mandela Bay several clinics and maternity units closed down when staff tested positive for Covid-19. At Dora Nginza Hospital in Port Elizabeth, the head of the Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Dr Mfundo Mabenge, and his team of trainee specialists, most of whom were still writing their exams, kept the unit going with a skeleton staff. The small team cleaned the wards and theatres, delivered babies, dished out medicine and kept this essential unit from collapsing. For us, they represent the never-die attitude of the thousands who have tirelessly kept the wheels of our health system turning – whether in the public or private sector. Driven by the three words: Urgency, Emergency and Disaster – with no time for long meetings, task teams and tenders, Gift of the Givers founder Dr Imtiaz Sooliman and his team, led by Ali Sablay and Corene Conradie have been on the road and on the phone 24/7 since March. In every corner of the country where disaster struck, Gift of the Givers stood up and showed up with only one goal, to help those who had nowhere else to turn, bringing water, beds, masks, thermometers, coffee, chocolate and Covid-19 tests. In a massive, heartbreaking blow that will reverberate through the Eastern Cape for many years, Covid-19 claimed Prof Lungile Pepeta in August 2020. However, before the virus got to him, this larger-than-life doctor was at the frontlines, fighting for more personnel for state hospitals and better planning, all while still continuing to treat babies with heart defects as a paediatric cardiologist. In death, his fight paid off when the state cardiology catheterisation laboratory opened again in November 2020 after being closed due to broken equipment for more than two years. We pay tribute to Pepeta and the many other health workers who paid the ultimate price. Imbumba Association for the Aged fought in court for the full payment of their care centre subsidies so that they could continue caring for the elderly in the Eastern Cape. Imbumba’s battle was won on behalf of many who serve the elderly, people who cannot speak for themselves and are our most vulnerable. The Amadiba Crisis Committee taught South Africa the value of true co-operative governance as they rallied the far-flung communities to all get behind the common goal of fighting Covid-19. Not only have they kept their community healthy, but they have had to deal with vandalism to their lodge, intruders who “came to fish” during hard lockdown and are currently fighting Sanral over decisions taken with regards to the N2 toll road. One of the most inspiring developments born out of the pandemic, has been the Community Action Networks (CANs). By early July, Gauteng had more than 100 CANs, made up of organisations and individuals who try to provide relief in the face of the humanitarian crisis unravelling in their communities. The more than 170 CANs in Cape Town consist of organisers, carers, some who have worked in outbreak situations before and some new to organising in this way. Gauteng’s CANs kicked off in March, when, with the lockdown looming, a small group of residents got together to form the Norwood, Orange Grove and Houghton (NOAH) CAN. NOAH soon joined a larger network of CANs that was launched in April, known as Gauteng Together. What unites them is that they are all responding to the long-standing health and socioeconomic crises that Covid-19 has exposed and exacerbated in our cities. Although they began as a rapid response to Covid-19, many CANs are starting to grapple with how to build back better, recognising that going back to a pre-Covid “normal” is not a goal we should aspire to, because there was nothing “normal” about the world before Covid-19. In fact, going “back to normal” is one of the worst things that could happen. Instead, they want to move forward by building a better society that is more socially and environmentally just. There is no “one size fits all”, as every neighbourhood is different. Some CANs have set up mask-making and distribution schemes. Others have opened community kitchens that provide hot meals to thousands of people every day, while also being sites for communicating and demonstrating Covid-safe practices, including handwashing, mask-wearing and physical distancing. We honour other community activists such as Joanie Frederiks in Tafelsig, Cape Town, an on-the-ground activist for more than 30 years who without any government support set up 22 feeding stations in the Tafelsig and Eastridge areas in Mitchells Plain and fed more than 10,000 people a day. Covid-19 is also the story of Londani Lushaka in Alexandra, Johannesburg. This organisation rose to the occasion when Covid-19 hit its community. The story is one of three women, a community that takes ownership of its problems, and is now keeping at least 600 children fed in a time of famine. One day when we look back on 2020 we can only hope that the statues that have been erected for wars past, will stand in the shadow of the statues erected in honour of our health and community workers. We hope that these statues will be in the form of thriving communities, happy children and functioning health systems. People who, when the chips were down, stepped up. People who, despite indescribable exhaustion, fear and at times lack of sleep, food, water and the proper protective equipment, took up the mantle of service and went to the coal face and looked in the eyes of scared, hungry and very ill people. Many people for whom their last contact with a human being, would have been these health and community workers. Many have paid the ultimate price and are part of the death statistics. Others will survive but will take years to process the remnants wrapped up in post traumatic stress disorders. As we write this tribute, we know that a second wave of Covid-19, by all accounts possibly worse than the first, is at our door and once again we will look to our health and community workers to step up. The greatest tribute we can pay these incredible people, the reluctant superheroes, is to do our bit – to wear our masks, keep our distance and lift our washed and sanitised hands in thanks. DM168 This story first appeared in our weekly Daily Maverick 168 newspaper which is available for free to Pick ‘n Pay Smartshoppers at these Pick ‘n Pay stores.  Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 1 Superheroes indeed. Let’s acknowledge the tremendous kindnesses and good amongst everyday South Africans.