Chicken & Aubergine Parma, a simple family meal. (Photo: Tony Jackman) For “Chicken Parma”, you top a roasted or fried chicken breast with tomato sauce (no, not ketchup), then Mozzarella and/or Parmesan (or Pecorino) and bake till the cheese is melted and golden. Parmigiana alla melanzane has nothing to do with chicken. Try mixing it up. Ingredients 4 filleted chicken breasts, sliced through the middle as when butterflying them, so you are left with two skinny chicken fillets per breast 500 ml home made tomato sauce (recipe described below) 1 medium onion 1 x 410 g tin chopped Italian tomatoes 1 x 115 g tub or sachet tomato purée 4 cloves garlic 4 thyme sprigs 4 oregano sprigs 1 Tbs red wine vinegar 2 or 3 brinjals (aubergines) depending on size 200 g grated Mozzarella Finely grated Parmesan Olive oil Salt and pepper to taste Basil leaves for garnish Method To make the tomato sauce, sauté the chopped onion and 2 of the chopped garlic cloves in olive oil until translucent, add the tomato puree and braise for two minutes, stirring, then add the can of chopped tomatoes and red wine vinegar with the fresh herbs. Seas0n to taste with salt and pepper. Simmer gently for half an hour for the flavours to develop. Be careful that it doesn’t catch or reduce too much. If it does, add a little water and reduce further. Fry the brinjal slices gently in olive oil with the remaining 2 garlic cloves and a little salt and pepper until just tender. Fry lightly salted chicken breast slices in olive oil on a gentle heat until just cooked (they will cook further in the oven). Lay chicken slices in an oven pan, top each with brinjal slices, top with grated mozzarella. Bake in a 200℃ oven for 5 to 10 minutes or until cheese is melted and lightly golden. Serve with a grating of Parmesan and ripped basil leaves. DM/TGIFood Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Send your Lockdown Recipes to tony@dailymaverick.co.za with a hi-resolution horizontal (landscape) photo. Thank God It’s Food is sponsored by Pick n Pay. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.