South Africa also a causality to the deadly pandemic, led President Cyril Ramaphosa to announce a national state of disaster in terms of the Disaster Management Act and implemented a nationwide lockdown in March 2020. The Government, together with various stakeholders, have used the lockdown period to both refine and intensify several measures to manage COVID-19. Brand South Africa as the custodian of the Nation Brand image and in line with national measures taken to contain the spread of COVID-19 infections, supports Government’s efforts to inform and educate citizens on the virus as well as the precautionary measures implemented. “The reality is that the pandemic brings with it uncertainty regarding the future. In order to be informed about the responses, perceptions and behaviours of South Africans as the country continues with its robust efforts to contain the spread of COVD-19, Brand South Africa will utilise its surveys- and qualitative research instruments to source insight in order to better serve the national effort- and society through its work”, said Brand South Africa’s General Manager for Research Dr Petrus De Kock speaking on COVID-19. During the month of April, the domestic perceptions online/mobile survey included a set of statements pertaining to a range of issues surrounding COVID-19. The Domestic Perceptions survey, provides the organisation with a general overview of mind sets and changes among South Africans with regards to their perceptions of the Nation Brand. During a crisis it is imperative to keep track of these perceptions. Over three hundred respondents were surveyed, these were some of the key findings; Commenting on the survey and some of the key lessons; Dr De Kock said; “While respondents show to be playing their part to curb the spread of COVID-19, there is a need for communication and information on the health system. On the other hand, citizens are convinced that their personal circumstances will not return to normal after the pandemic. But, what will that new reality look like? Due to the business unusual approach the country has had to take to fight COVID-19, we also asked respondents whether they are willing to change the way they engage with other people, government or business in efforts to restore the economy when the local manifestation of the COVID-19 pandemic has been brought under control? A healthy 44% of respondents indicated that they are willing to find new ways to interact. This means that while we are, as a society, still fighting the outbreak, we need to think about new ways of cooperating to grow the economy and mend society post-COVID-19.” Major issues from the survey findings not only assist in understanding domestic perceptions but also affirms South Africa as resilient and able to withstand a global pandemic. A country that is able to work together for the betterment of its people. For tracking purposes and to develop a more robust sample, the set of COVID-19 questions will be repeated in at least the next three monthly surveys. For the full view of the Domestic Perceptions Research Programme Monthly Special Report click here. DM  For more information on COVID 19 in South Africa, visit the following websites www.health.gov.za or www.sacoronavirus.co.za To contribute to the Solidarity Fund visit www.solidarityfund.co.za To learn more about the Play Your Part pledge visit www.playyourpartsa.co.za About Brand South Africa Brand South Africa is the official marketing agency of South Africa, with a mandate to build the country’s brand reputation, in order to improve its global competitiveness. Its aim is also to promote pride and patriotism among South Africans, to contribute to nation building and social cohesion. Visit www.brandsouthafrica.com Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.