(Photo: Unsplash/Fushion Medical)  First published by The Conversation In the context of the initial uncertainty, South Africa’s early lockdown was prudent. It allowed time to prepare the healthcare system, to ramp up widespread testing and to introduce other measures to reduce transmission rates. Extending the lockdown is no longer required. It is also no longer reducing transmission rates and has become unaffordable. Current evidence indicates that: The success of these interventions depends on the buy-in and cooperation of citizens. The message to South Africa must be clear: It is not going to be spared deaths from Covid-19. But it is possible to prevent some of these through our own actions and by promoting strategic public health interventions. South Africa should plan to mitigate the effects of the pandemic using the above strategies for at least two years, or until a vaccine becomes available. Areas of uncertainty There are two important areas of additional uncertainty. The first is that it is too early to establish the effect of Covid-19 on people living with HIV. But emerging evidence appears to be reassuring. People living with HIV who are on antiretroviral treatment do not appear to be at an increased risk. Secondly, South Africa is not achieving the testing levels or reporting speeds required to contain the spread through diagnosis and contact-tracing. This gets harder as infection rates rise. Without this, it is unlikely that the country will stay ahead of the epidemic. South Africa’s strategic thinking should, therefore, be informed by the following: It is therefore vital that the country develops strategies to control the virus and simultaneously manage the health, social and economic implications without resorting to further lockdowns. Economic strategy We suggest that South Africa move rapidly to Level 2 lockdown and that a risk-assessed framework be adapted. We propose that such a framework permit all economic activity, except where there is a clear and material threat to public health. The other exception is activities that pose a high risk of transmission over a short period of time, for example, mass gatherings or transmission hotspots. The framework should specify, by exception, economic activity not allowed on public health grounds. This would see the reopening of critical areas of the economy coupled with current behavioural and societal mechanisms to slow viral spread. Within this framework, we also suggest that: The health risks associated with this economic strategy should be premised on effective strategies to mitigate the rapid rate of transmission of the virus. This is best achieved by: This list is not exhaustive but sets parameters which can guide an adaptation to Level 2. The ability of the country to avert the possible full impact of the virus will only succeed if all citizens of South Africa cooperate willingly with measures aimed at slowing the rate of transmission. If that does not happen, the full might of this virus will manifest itself sooner rather than later, irrespective of the level of official lockdown. DM Disclosure statement: Imraan Valodia receives research funding from national science councils and international research funding institutions. Willem Daniel Francois Venter receives funding from multiple donors for research and programme implementation; in addition, he receives pharmaceutical support for research projects, as well as for giving academic talks and for participation on advisory boards. Alex van den Heever, Lucy Allais, Martin Veller, and Shabir Madhi do not work for, consult, own shares in or receive funding from any company or organisation that would benefit from this article, and have disclosed no relevant affiliations beyond their academic appointment. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider.