When Lexi and Ronnie Austin heard about a pack of wolves that was destined to be sold into the hunting trade in 2016, they knew that their dream of running an animal sanctuary would need to become a reality fast. So after scrambling to raise the R50,000 needed to register a non-profit organisation, the couple started the All Hearts Foundation and rescued the pack. Lexi and Ronnie moved the pack to two other locations before they finally settled in Hartbeespoort in 2018. The aim of All Hearts Foundation is to educate people on exotic wildlife and predators such as wolves and create awareness of the canned wolf hunting trade and the dangers of keeping wolf hybrids as pets. “Everybody is aware of the canned lion hunting trade. We all fight for the lions because they are the number one predator to shoot for trophies,” Lexi said, emphasising that fighting against canned wolf hunting was just as important. A hybrid or wolf dog is a combination of a wolf and a domestic dog. Said Ronnie: “Hybrids are a massive problem in our country. People don’t speak enough about this either. Many people have this craze about wanting to own a wolf and will go on to the internet and look for wolves. “They will then get scammed into buying what they think is a wolf. They will think they own a wolf, but they actually own a monster dog because there are people breeding wolves with pitbulls, Labradors, German shepherds and other breeds. There are so many breeders out there and we try very hard to educate people out there on the dangers of hybrids.” According to Ronnie, hybrids have the potential of turning on owners or their children. “A hybrid does not know if it is a wolf or a dog. One minute the dog instinct will be there, it will love you but then a small animal can come by and the wolf instinct will kick in and it will treat that animal or even a child as prey. There are too many out there,” Ronnie said. All Hearts Foundation usually receives a call a week about hybrids and Lexi feels legislation is needed to stop the trade. The sanctuary is in a constant financial struggle and the Covid-19 pandemic has added to the strain. The foundation’s biggest challenges are the expensive vet bills that stack up and their monthly running costs, which come to between R40,000 and R50,000. “Having a non-profit organisation is very difficult financially. It takes a big toll on you. We are very reliant on donations and public visits. The pandemic has [been] a knock [to] us. Our monthly donors cut back on their donations because of Covid-19 and we have now fallen short on our monthly rental. This has never been the case in the last two years, but because of the lockdown we were unable to make our general income.” The hard lockdown meant the couple had to close the sanctuary’s doors for five months. “We still cannot function normally. Covid-19 is a huge concern, even for the health of our animals,” Lexi said. The pandemic has affected the couple’s plans to purchase the property they now occupy or buy new premises. They are turning away wolves as they are uncertain if they will remain at their present sanctuary. According to Lexi and Ronnie, it is essential to own land to function at full capacity. This would give them freedom to add new buildings and make alterations. It would also allow them to expand and take on other exotics and rescue more wild animals. “We are looking for investors and will be more than happy to share our dream,” said Lexi. Apart from wolves, All Heart Foundation is home to rescued dogs, 20 cats, five sheep, a horse, birds, fish, a pig and Shimbungu – a dog paralysed from the waist. Shimbungu was a victim of a hit-and-run accident and was left for dead on a Namibian road. He found a home at All Hearts Foundation and despite a difficult recovery, he has made remarkable progress. DM Read more about the All Heart Foundation here. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet