At a picket on Friday, an appeal was made by the opposition in Zimbabwe to the South African Development Community (SADC), the African Union, the United Nations and the international community for help.
Photo / Shiraaz Mohamed. On Friday, 2 October a handful of members from the MDC gathered outside the Zimbabwean embassy in Pretoria where the opposition party’s chairman, Trust Ndlovu said the embassy no longer represented the interests of the Zimbabwean people, only the interests of President Emmerson Mnangagwa and Zanu-PF. Ndlovu appealed for the release of all political prisoners in Zimbabwe. These include Joanna Mamombe, Last Maengahama, Tunga Madzokere and student leader Tafadzwa Ngadziore.  And he called on the Southern African Development Community (SADC) and the rest of the international community to help. Secretary of the MDC, Nhamo Chikowore said, “The situation in Zimbabwe is terrible. It requires the intervention of the international community, SADC and the African Union, in particular. As citizens of Zimbabwe we are supposed to be protected but we are not. If you look at the number of Zimbabweans living in South Africa, they are in excess of 3- million people. They are here not because they want to be here. They are here because there are no opportunities in Zimbabwe or they are under persecution. “I can talk for myself. I left Zimbabwe because of political persecution. I cannot go back to Zimbabwe. Now it is time for the African region to stand up, not for the Zimbabwean government but for the people of Zimbabwe. This is what we are crying for.” An MDC petition, handed over to embassy officials, condemned the arrests of political campaigners, on the pretext they were plotting to unleash violence and overthrow the government, and the conditions in which they are held. The petition called for due process to be followed, that unbiased investigations be conducted before arrests, and that the accused are presumed innocent until proven guilty. The opposition party said the arrests violated the Zimbabwean constitution on freedom of assembly and expression, as well as the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights. The MDC plans to demonstrate once lockdown restrictions allow and will be holding night vigils at the embassy and consulates, until their demands are met. The Zanu-PF has consistently denied claims of Zimbabwe being in crisis. DM Please see here previously published articles in Daily Maverick: https://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/2020-09-28-missing-witness-to-an-abduction-part-one/ https://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/2020-08-10-fixing-zimbabwe-requires-south-african-honesty-about-itself/ https://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/2020-08-21-zimbabwes-frustrated-opposition-urges-sa-to-take-the-lead-in-helping-end-the-crisis-in-that-country/ https://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/2020-09-18-south-africa-remains-committed-to-mediating-in-zimbabwe-crisis-pandor/     Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet