epa08760858 A handout photo made available by the International Federation of the Red Cross (IFRC) shows a local man walking through floodwater to a pickup point for relief packages in Quang An Commune, Thua Thien Hue, Vietnam, 20 October 2020 (issued 21 October 2020). EPA-EFE/Yen Duong / HANDOUT HANDOUT EDITORIAL USE ONLY/NO SALES Typhoon Molave, with wind speeds of 125 kilometre (77 miles) per hour and gusts of up to 150 kph, left the main Philippine island of Luzon earlier on Monday, with heavy rain causing seven landslides and floods in 11 areas, the disaster agency said. There were no reports of casualties, but 12 fishermen at sea failed to return to Catanduanes province off the country’s eastern coast. Molave, the 17th typhoon to hit the Philippines this year, is forecast to make landfall in central Vietnam on Wednesday, with wind speeds of up to 135 kph. It will be the fourth storm to hit Vietnam in a tumultuous month during which floods and landslides have killed 130 people and left 20 missing in the central region. Vietnam is prone to destructive storms and flooding due to its long coastline. “This is a very strong typhoon that will impact a large area,” Prime Minister Nguyen Xuan Phuc said in an urgent warning to provinces and cities in Molave’s path to prepare. Phuc compared Molave to Typhoon Damrey, which killed more than 100 people in central Vietnam in 2017. He ordered boats ashore and told the security forces to get ready. “Troops must deploy full force to support people, including mobilising helicopters, tanks and other means of transportation if needed,” Phuc said in a statement. About 11.8 million people in Vietnam’s costal provinces are exposed to the threat of intense flooding, with 35% of settlements located on crowded and eroding coastlines, a World Bank report said last week. (Reporting by Khanh Vu and Phuong Nguyen in Hanoi and Neil Jerome Morales and Enrico dela Cruz in Manila; Editing by Martin Petty) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet