A general view of Tin Roof Night club which has allegedly been linked to at least 63 COVID-19 cases affecting high school pupils on October 14, 2020 in Cape Town, South Africa. It is reported that that Western Cape Premier has called on the Western Cape Liquor Authority (WCLA) and police to investigate the bar. (Photo by Gallo Images/Misha Jordaan) The main focus of Western Cape Premier Alan Winde’s weekly press conference was a bar, where 38 matrics contracted Covid-19. On Thursday, 15 October during the briefing held virtually, provincial officials stressed the importance of maintaining Covid-19 vigilance. “We cannot relax,” said Nomafrench Mbombo, the Western Cape Health MEC during introductory remarks at the briefing. She urged hand washing, physical distancing, mask wearing and not touching common surfaces when out at gatherings. “It is crucial that we stick to these rules so that we make a point that we don’t go back [to a high number of Covid-19 cases]”, adding “It is in your hands”. Mbombo said everyone has a responsibility to follow the rules in order to stop the spread of the coronavirus. Addressing the outbreak at Tin Roof Bar in Claremont, in the Southern Suburbs of Cape Town, Dr Melvin Moodley from the provincial Health Department said the alarm was raised when general practitioners in the area noticed increases in Covid-19 cases among 15-19 year olds. These cases were all traced back to the bar which is popular with young people in the area. Since then, there have been 89 Covid-19 cases linked to the event. Of these, 38 are matrics due to start writing their final exams soon. Moodley said in total, 64 pupils and a teacher have been infected in the southern sub-district of Cape Town. Of that number, 44 were matrics (including the 38 tracked to the Tin Roof bar). Read in News24: Tin Roof party: Winde wants probe after dozens catch Covid-19, but club says it followed protocols Winde said he had asked for an investigation into the incident. “This is really to wake us up,” said the head of the provincial health department, Dr Keith Cloete, while he gave a situational update of Covid-19 in the Western Cape. Over the past week, there had been an increase in cases, particularly in the Southern Suburbs of Cape Town. Infections have decreased in areas such as Khayelitsha, Mitchells Plain and the Tygerberg region. In the province, there would be a strong focus on surveillance from health authorities as well as strong messaging on collective and individual responsibilities, Cloete said. By the last health update on Wednesday evening, the Western Cape had 112,605 confirmed cases of Covid-19. The province has seen 4,277 Covid-19 related deaths, with 2,818 active cases at the moment. Beyond the outbreak, the department worried about more potential outbreaks going into the summer season. “We’re all concerned,”  said Cloete, adding that factors such as Covid-19 fatigue, people being on breaks and wanting to gather poses risks to outbreaks. “We have to remain vigilant and will respond as things occur,” he said. DM Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 2 I wonder how many of the kids infected at the establishment are over the age of 18 and are actually allowed to drink alcohol. (I say “kids” because that is how they are behaving, like kids). Perhaps the authorities need to investigate and check the age of each the kids that were infected in the bar. My thought exactly Graeme!
The bar followed *protocol*. Is it protocol to allow under age children into their space?? Charge the idiots! Shut them down!