epa08745732 A protester holds a banner during a protest against the Nigeria rogue police, otherwise known as Special Anti-Robbery Squad (SARS), in Lekki district of Lagos, Nigeria, 14 October 2020. During the week of 05 October, the Nigerian federal government yielded to a call by the Nigerian youth calling for the disbandment of SARS, for its public harassments, innocent killings of citizens, and other unethical conducts. But an announcement of a new police squad--Special Weapons and Tactics (SWAT), by Nigeria's police chief has sparked a new wave of protests across Nigeria. EPA-EFE/AKINTUNDE AKINLEYE Protesters have staged daily marches for a week, calling for an overhaul of police forces. Police have responded to the demonstrations with beatings, tear gas and gunfire, which human rights group Amnesty International said had killed at least 10 people. Police agreed on Tuesday to stop using force against protesters. The military, which in recent years has repeatedly been accused of human rights abuses that it has denied, issued a statement late on Wednesday titled “Nigerian Army warns subversive elements and trouble makers”. “The NA (Nigerian Army) is ready to fully support the civil authority in whatever capacity to maintain law and order and deal with any situation decisively,” it said in the statement, which did not mention the anti-police protests. In response to the protests, the head of Nigeria’s police force on Sunday dissolved the Special Anti-Robbery Squad (SARS), a unit that demonstrators have long accused of beatings, killings and extortion. Demonstrators have called for more meaningful reforms. Protesters say they fear a new unit, whose creation to “fill the gaps” left by SARS was announced on Tuesday, was just a rebranding of the controversial squad. (Reporting by Alexis Akwagyiram in Lagos; Additional reporting by Paul Carsten in Abuja and Libby George in Lagos; Writing by Alexis Akwagyiram Editing by Frances Kerry) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet