epa08611339 (FILE) - Prime Minister of Mali, Boubou Cisse leaves the Elysee Palace after attending meetings in Paris, France, 10 September 2019 (reissued 18 August 2020). Reports on 18 August 2020 state that gunfire was heard at Malian army base Kati outside Bamako. Foreign embassies such as Norway's and France's have called on their citizens in Mali to stay home amid what could possibly be a coup. Mali's president and prime minister are allegedly detained by mutinous soldiers, according to a regional official. EPA-EFE/IAN LANGSDON  Although a transitional government has been appointed after the Aug. 18 coup, Goita, who led the coup, remained in the government as vice president in charge of security and defence issues. The officials’ release was one of the demands of international powers including the West African regional bloc, which this week lifted economic sanctions against Mali after the appointment of the transitional government. The senior figures had been held since the ouster of President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, which alarmed Mali’s foreign partners who feared it would further destabilise Mali and undermine a joint fight against Islamist militants in the wider Sahel region. The former head of the national assembly, Moussa Timbine, and eight generals were among those released, said the statement issued by the vice president late on Wednesday. “However those concerned remain at the disposal of the judicial authorities,” it said. (Reporting by Tiemoko Diallo; Writing by Alessandra Prentice; Editing by Bate Felix and Janet Lawrence) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet