epa08729606 US House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-CA) speaks during her weekly news conference at the US Capitol Building in Washington, DC, USA, 08 October 2020. Negotiations between US House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-CA) and the White House are expected to continue today as lawmakers seek another COVID-19 relief bill. EPA-EFE/ALEX EDELMAN Pelosi, the top elected U.S. Democrat, said she wanted a bill passed before the Nov. 3 presidential election between Republican Trump and Democrat Joe Biden, but acknowledged an agreement would have to come within 48 hours for that to happen. “I’m optimistic because, again, we’ve been back and forth on all of this,” Pelosi said in an interview with ABC’s “This Week.” But with her negotiating partner, Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, in the Middle East until Tuesday, a deal appears to be a long shot. Trump told reporters in Nevada: “I think Nancy Pelosi maybe is coming along. We’ll find out.” “I want to do it at a bigger number than she wants. That doesn’t mean all the Republicans agree with me, but I think they will in the end,” he said. The White House proposed a $1.8 trillion stimulus last week to help Americans struggling with the economic ravages of the coronavirus pandemic. Pelosi said the offer fell short in a range of areas, including tax credits for poor people, aid to state and local governments, worker protections and rent help. She has stuck to her demand for a $2.2 trillion aid and stimulus package. The Republicans who control the Senate are loath to pass another giant relief bill. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said the Senate would vote on Wednesday on a $500 billion proposal to target specific areas of need. Democrats have rejected so-called skinny bills with pared-down funding, saying much more is needed. “We have to see what he brings to the floor. But Democrats have worked on this for months. Mitch McConnell hasn’t even been part of the negotiations,” Senator Chris Coons told CNN. (Reporting by Doina Chiacu in Washington and Jeff Mason in Nevada; Additional reporting by Diane Bartz in Washington; Editing by Matthew Lewis and Peter Cooney) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet