epa08693181 Sinovac's COVID-19 vaccine candidate CoronaVac are displayed at Sinovac Biotech during a government-organized media visiting in Beijing, China, 24 September 2020. Sinovac is a Chinese vaccine maker that is developing the COVID-19 vaccine candidate called CoronaVac. EPA-EFE/WU HONG Hundreds of thousands of essential workers and other groups considered at high risk in China have been given locally-developed vaccines even as clinical trials had not been fully completed, raising safety concerns among experts. Socorro Escalate, WHO’s coordinator for essential medicines and health technologies in the Western Pacific region, told a news conference conducted online that China had held preliminary discussions with WHO to have its vaccines included in a list for emergency use. The WHO’s emergency use listing procedure allows unlicensed vaccines and treatments to be assessed to expedite their availability in public health emergencies. This helps WHO member states and UN procurement agencies to determine the acceptability of the vaccines. “Potentially through this emergency use listing the quality and safety of these vaccines and efficacy could be assessed. ..and then this could be made available for our licensees,” Escalante said. China has at least four experimental vaccines in the final stage of clinical trials – two are developed by state-backed China National Biotec Group (CNBG), and the remaining two are from Sinovac Biotech and CanSino Biologics respectively. They are tested in such countries as Pakistan, Indonesia, Brazil, Russia and the United Arab Emirates. Last month, the UAE authorized the emergency use of a CNBG vaccine, the first international emergency clearance for one of China’s vaccines, just six weeks after human trials began in the Gulf Arab state. Philippines President Rodrigo Duterte said last month it would prioritise China and Russia in his country’s global shopping for a vaccine. (Reporting by John Geddie and Aradhana Aravindan; Editing by Simon Cameron-Moore) Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. All Comments 1 The countries mentioned are not known for their human rights. I will rather put my trust in Prof Madhi. Roll on a vaccine but ?