A learner at the Christiana School for the Blind and Partially Sighted in North West. (Photo by Gallo Images / Foto24 / Bongiwe Gumede) See the Copyright Amendment Bill here. The group says that in its current format, the copyright regime is “discriminatory” and “exclusionary” and that it infringes the rights of pupils, teachers, people with disabilities, artists, musicians, and writers. They are lobbying for urgent reforms that would be in line with our Constitution’s Bill of Rights as well as the international human rights agreements that South Africa has ratified. The organisations point out that the bill prioritises business interests over human rights obligations and that a further delay on reforms would be a betrayal of a 14-year process. Below we publish the letter from the group: 5 October 2020 Dear Members of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry (National Assembly) and Select Committee on Trade and Industry, Economic Development, Small Business Development, Tourism, Employment and Labour (National Council of Provinces), BILL OF RIGHTS IMPLICATIONS OF RECENT COPYRIGHT REFORMS We write because we believe copyright reforms in South Africa are urgent. Our current copyright regime is exclusionary and discriminatory. Reforms are absolutely necessary in order to bring our copyright law in line with the Constitution and the Bill of Rights. The impacts of Covid-19 have made this need even more pressing. We appeal to you to effect these reforms without further delay. In this letter we will highlight: (1) why these reforms are necessary and urgent; (2) slowness of reform will infringe the rights of blind and visually impaired persons and prolong ongoing unequal access to education; and (3) the ways in which delay in passing the Bill will ensure that these rights remain unfulfilled. REFORM IS NECESSARY AND URGENT DELAYS WILL INFRINGE RIGHTS AND IMPACT LIVES FURTHER DELAYS WILL PERPETUATE RIGHTS INFRINGEMENTS In summary, the Committees and the Department of Trade, Industry and Competition have done extensive work on these issues in recent years, and have provided multiple opportunities for public consultation. This consultation has directly fed into the drafting and redrafting of the Bill. Through this process you have produced an excellent Bill – a Bill that has given us hope for a fairer, more just and more equal future for all South Africans. We appeal to you to stand firm against a well-resourced industry lobby acting solely in their own interests that has shown they will do anything to delay or derail the Bill. We believe that their push to retag the Bill, for instance, has little to do with any real legal requirements, and much to do with delaying the process and creating opportunities to derail the Bill’s passage. We believe that it is possible for the Committees to respectfully address the President’s concerns while also standing firm against industry pressure. And finally, we stress again that, for us, this is urgent. Every day that copyright reforms are delayed means another day that the rights of pupils, teachers, persons with disabilities, artists, musicians, and writers are infringed upon by outdated and discriminatory copyright laws.   Endorsed by:  Prof. Ann Skelton, Unesco Chair on Education Law in Africa, University of Pretoria Prof. Moeketsi Letseka, Unesco Chair on Open Distance Learning, University of South Africa (Unisa) Prof. JAK Olivier, Unesco Chair on Multimodal Learning and Open Educational Resources, North-West University Justice Zak Yacoob, retired Justice of the Constitutional Court of South Africa Prof. Jonathan Klaaren, Professor, University of the Witwatersrand Sanya Samtani, Doctoral Researcher, Graduate Research Resident at Bonavero Institute of Human Rights, University of Oxford Marcus Low, Editor, Spotlight Ntshavheni Netshituni, President of the South African Braille Authority Dr. Andrew Rens, Senior Research Fellow, Research ICT Africa Prof. Sandra Fredman, Professor of Law and Director of the Oxford Human Rights Hub, University of Oxford Cathy Donaldson, President BlindSA Dr. Klaus D. Beiter, Associate Prof., Faculty of Law (International Human Rights and IP Law), North-West University Makhosazana Mkhatshwa, Research Officer, Treatment Action Campaign Dr. Tobias Schonwetter, Associate Prof. & Director of IP Unit (Faculty of Law), University of Cape Town Christo de Klerk, Exco member of Blind SA: Chairperson of its Committee on Accessible Publications and Equipment/Assistive Devices Cameron McConnachie, Attorney, Legal Resources Centre André Steyn, Chairperson of Legal and Constitution Committee Blind SA Gino Fransman, Open Education Influencers (Project Leader), Nelson Mandela University Nurina Ally, Lecturer, Department of Public Law, University of Cape Town Cyprian Bheki Khawula, Chairperson of eThekwini Disability Forum Yana van Leeve, Equal Education National Council member Paul G. West, South African Chapter of Creative Commons Rynhardt Kruger, Blind Academic Denise Nicholson, Specialist Copyright Librarian Godfrey Zihlwele, BlindSA Jan Kleinhans, BlindSA Jack Devnarain, South African Guild of Actors Kyla Jade, South African History Online, Researcher Tebogo Koboyankwe, Treatment Action Campaign Sibongile Hlatshwayo, Treatment Action Campaign Tumelo, Treatment Action Campaign Pamella, Treatment Action Campaign Willem Venter Mrs JM Spalletta Nosisa Pheelwane Marietjie Coetzee DM/MC Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet