Spaghetti with bacon, peas, mint and parsley. (Photo: Tony Jackman) (Serves 4) Ingredients 200 g back bacon, diced 1 cup/ 250 g frozen peas 2 Tbsp olive oil 500 g full cream Handful spearmint, chopped Handful Italian parsley, stems remove, leaves chopped 500 g spaghetti or linguine 1 or 2 ladles of retained pasta water 200 g grated Parmesan Salt and pepper to taste Method Use a big, wide pan for the sauce rather than a deep pot. Boil the peas in lightly salted water till al dente, drain and keep aside. Dice the bacon and fry in a little olive oil till crisp. Add the peas and cream. Season with salt and pepper and simmer to reduce the cream over a moderate heat. Add finely grated Parmesan, as much as you like or about 200 g. Cook the pasta in lightly salted water till al dente. Add the chopped mint and parsley to the sauce. Use a slotted spoon to pick up pasta, drain it, and add it to the sauce; repeat until all used. Stir it around to coat all the pasta with sauce. Add a ladle or two of the pasta water to the creamed sauce; this emulsifies it. Reduce down a little more, taste for seasoning and adjust if you need to, and serve. DM/TGIFood Our Thank God It’s Food newsletter is sent to subscribers every Friday at 6pm, and published on the TGIFood platform on Daily Maverick. It’s all about great reads on the themes of food and life. Subscribe here. Send your Lockdown Recipes to tony@dailymaverick.co.za with a hi-resolution horizontal (landscape) photo. Thank God It’s Food is sponsored by Pick n Pay. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet