Kathrada with young people.
(Photo: Ahmed Kathrada Foundation ) The Ahmed Kathrada Foundation has embarked on an initiative to grow our youth work by creating youth clubs across the country. These clubs will develop youth activists by promoting and preserving the values and principles of Ahmed Kathrada. Eight youth clubs have been piloted in and around the Finetown, Eldorado Park, Lawley/Ennerdale, Lehae, Lenasia, Lenasia South, Orange Farm and Thembelihle communities. Throughout this year the youth clubs have initiated campaigns to address challenges and issues within their localities, while at the same time strengthening their capacity as young activists in the communities they serve. Projects have included: The programme aims to build further capacity through training workshops, dialogues and activities. Young members of Kathrada Youth Clubs are provided with a platform to engage with thought leaders in different sectors of society. They are encouraged to establish club structures and the programme also focuses on instilling moral and ethical leadership. Young people are able to draw links between the struggles of the past and those faced by youth today. We appeal to the public to help us train more young people to take forward the legacy and values of Kathrada and leaders of his generation. Your contributions will help with: Should you wish to support the Kathrada Youth Clubs please visit the Ahmed Kathrada Foundation website. DM/MC Delani Majola is communications officer at the Ahmed Kathrada Foundation. Please note you must be a Maverick Insider to comment. Sign up here or sign in if you are already an Insider. Everybody has an opinion but not everyone has the knowledge and the experience to contribute meaningfully to a discussion. That’s what we want from our members. Help us learn with your expertise and insights on articles that we publish. We encourage different, respectful viewpoints to further our understanding of the world. View our comments policy here. No Comments, yet